JCB: Article
Simple rules for passive diffusion through the
nuclear pore complex
Benjamin L. Timney,1* Barak Raveh,2,3* Roxana Mironska,1 Jill M. Trivedi,1 Seung Joong Kim,2,3 Daniel Russel,2,3
Susan R. Wente,4 Andrej Sali,2,3 and Michael P. Rout1
1Laboratory of Cellular and Structural Biology, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065
2Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences and 3Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158
4Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232
Passive macromolecular diffusion through nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) is thought to decrease dramatically beyond a
30–60-kD size threshold. Using thousands of independent time-resolved fluorescence microscopy measurements in vivo,
we show that the NPC lacks such a firm size threshold; instead, it forms a soft barrier to passive diffusion that intensifies
gradually with increasing molecular mass in both the wild-type and mutant strains with various subsets of phenylala-
nine-glycine (FG) domains and different levels of baseline passive permeability. Brownian dynamics simulations repli-
cate these findings and indicate that the soft barrier results from the highly dynamic FG repeat domains and the diffusing
macromolecules mutually constraining and competing for available volume in the interior of the NPC, setting up entropic
repulsion forces. We found that FG domains with exceptionally high net charge and low hydropathy near the cytoplas-
mic end of the central channel contribute more strongly to obstruction of passive diffusion than to facilitated transport,
revealing a compartmentalized functional arrangement within the NPC.
Introduction
The nuclear pore complex (NPC), residing in the nuclear en- undesirable access to the nucleus or compromise the cell’s anti-
velope (NE), is the main mediator of transport between the nu- viral defenses (Simon and Rout, 2014; Mettenleiter, 2016).
cleus and the cytoplasm in all eukaryotic cells (Christie et al., Macromolecules traverse the NPC through either facilitated
2016; Knockenhauer and Schwartz, 2016; Musser and Grün- or passive diffusion. Facilitated diffusion is the rapid translocation
wald, 2016). It also plays an important part in transcriptional of cargo-carrying nuclear transport receptors (NTRs) through in-
regulation, signal transduction, cell growth, and the cell cycle teractions with FG domains, and it is generally but not necessarily
(Strambio-De-Castillia et al., 2010; Schellhaus et al., 2016). coupled to energy input from the nuclear GTPase Ran (Quimby
The NPC is one of the largest macromolecular complexes found and Dasso, 2003). Passive diffusion, in contrast, is the equilibration
in eukaryotic cells. It is made of hundreds of copies of broadly of ions, small molecules, and small- to medium-sized macromole-
conserved proteins, collectively referred to as nucleoporins, or cules between the cytoplasm and the nucleoplasm, independent of
nups. Approximately one third of these are classed as FG nups, NTRs and GTP hydrolysis. FG domains obstruct the passive diffu-
because they contain domains with long stretches of repeated sion of large macromolecules (Paine and Feldherr, 1972; Paine et
phenylalanine-glycine (FG) motifs separated by hydrophilic al., 1975; Keminer and Peters, 1999; Ribbeck and Görlich, 2001;
flexible linkers. FG nups play a key role in forming the selec- Mohr et al., 2009; Ma et al., 2012), restricting access to the nucleus
tive barrier to transport. Although the NPC is remarkably robust and contributing to the retention of nuclear and cytoplasmic factors
to extensive deletions of FG repeat domains in Saccharomyces in their appropriate subcellular compartments. Hence, whether a
cerevisiae (Strawn et al., 2004; Terry and Wente, 2007), alter- given macromolecule can passively diffuse through the NPC on a
ations to FG nups are associated with many defects, includ- physiologically relevant time scale has an important bearing on our
ing the onset of numerous types of cancers (Simon and Rout, understanding of nuclear maintenance and regulation.
2014), as well as with viral infection, in which they might allow
A rigid or soft barrier to passive diffusion?
A well-established determinant of passive diffusion rates is mo-
*B.L. Timney and B. Raveh contributed equally to this paper.
lecular mass, which was observed to affect passive permeability
Correspondence to Andrej Sali: sali@salilab.org; or Michael P. Rout: rout@
rockefeller.edu
Abbreviations used: DLS, dynamic-light scattering; FG, phenylalanine-glycine;
© 2016 Timney et al. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–
LAS SO, Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator; N/C, nucleus/
Noncommercial–Share Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the
cytoplasm; NE, nuclear envelope; NPC, nuclear pore complex; NTR, nuclear publication date (see http: //www .rupress .org /terms). After six months it is available under a
transport receptor; nup, nucleoporin; PCA, principal component analysis; PrA, Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 Unported license,
Protein A; SAXS, small-angle x-ray scattering; WT, wild type. as described at http ://creativecommons .org /licenses /by -nc -sa /3 .0 /).
The Rockefeller University Press $30.00
J. Cell Biol. Vol. 215 No. 1 57–76
www.jcb.org/cgi/doi/10.1083/jcb.201601004 JCB 57
YGOLOIB
LLE
C
F
O
LA
NRUOJ
EHT
Downloaded
from
http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/215/1/57/1596505/jcb_201601004.pdf
by
guest
on
05
December
2025
Figure 1. Characterizing the passive permeability barrier of yeast NPCs. (A) Expected decay in passive permeability rates with molecular mass in a
rigid versus soft barrier to passive transport. (B) Permeability of yeast NPCs determined in vivo using a FRAP approach. From left to right: At time t = 0 s,
the cytoplasmic pool of reporter macromolecules is photobleached with a spot-bleaching laser (cyan crosshair), and the nuclear fluorescence in a single
cell is plotted over time, as the nuclear pool of reporters equilibrates with the cytoplasm through passive diffusion. Bars, 1 µm. Note, at steady state, the
cytoplasm can appear ∼20% less bright than the nucleus because of vesicles and other structures below imaging resolution that do not contain GFP. We
have not adjusted for this small deviance from the ideal N/C of 1, as the effect is small and consistent between strains. The mean transport time τ is the
time constant of the exponential decay in nuclear fluorescence; the nuclear volume, cytoplasmic volumes, and number of NPCs are then quantified based
on 3D reconstruction of the cell, using a complete image series through the z axis acquired after the time course. These data are integrated to compute
the permeability coefficient in a single cell. The population mean of several such measurements from many cells is computed from multiple independent
measurements, where each dot in the violin plot indicates a permeability coefficient from a single cell. AU, arbitrary units.
in seminal studies by Paine et al. in the 1970s (Paine and Feld- models is generally indirect, because existing experimental
herr, 1972; Paine et al., 1975) using state-of-the-art methods technologies are limited in their ability to probe FG repeats
for that time, suggesting a molecular mass size threshold of within NPCs of living cells at sufficient spatial and temporal
30–60 kD for permeation of the nucleus. Recent in vitro stud- resolutions and because of possible differences in the system
ies over the last two decades also suggested a relatively sharp behavior under in vivo and in vitro conditions. Finally, al-
threshold of 30–60 kD (Keminer and Peters, 1999; Ribbeck and though many of these models postulate a relatively homoge-
Görlich, 2001; Mohr et al., 2009; Ma et al., 2012), although nous distribution of FG repeats in the NPC, it has also been
such in vitro systems have recently been shown to be quite sen- suggested that FG nups in different regions of the NPC may
sitive to the precise experimental conditions (e.g., the concen- play specific functional roles (Rout and Wente, 1994; Patel et
tration of transport receptors and the nuclear factor Ran; Ma al., 2007; Yamada et al., 2010; Popken et al., 2015). The extent
et al., 2012; Lowe et al., 2015). Larger molecules up to 230 of this functional partitioning and the precise roles of different
kD in size have also been observed to permeate the NPCs in FG nups remain unclear.
vivo on the time scale of many minutes to hours (Wang and To discern between the rigid barrier and soft barrier func-
Brattain, 2007; Popken et al., 2015). Nonetheless, the prevailing tional models, we have used time-resolved fluorescence micros-
functional model of passive transport, which we term the “rigid copy that allowed us to quantify the permeability of NPCs to
barrier” model, is that of a barrier with a firm size threshold of macromolecules of varying molecular sizes, in living S. cerevi-
40 kD for passive diffusion (Christie et al., 2016; Knockenhauer siae cells, resulting in a rigorous characterization of the relation
and Schwartz, 2016; Musser and Grünwald, 2016; Schmidt and between molecular size and passive permeability. We also used
Görlich, 2016). According to this prevailing view, the slow per- theoretical modeling and extensive coarse-grained computer
meation of larger macromolecules across the NPC is regarded simulations to assess possible biophysical models that could ex-
as residual leakage beyond such a firm threshold (Kirli et al., plain our empirical observations. To study the effect of various
2015; Fig. 1 A, red curve). However, this supposed “leakage” FG domains on passive transport, we measured changes from
may be also interpreted by an alternative “soft barrier” model of wild-type (WT) passive permeability in a set of combinatorially
transport. In this model, passive transport rates are expected to deleted mutant S. cerevisiae strains, in which substantial sub-
decrease much more gradually with increasing molecular mass sets of FG domains were deleted from the NPC. We compared
than previously realized (Fig. 1 A, black curve). these measurements to simulations of NPCs with depleted FG
Whether the barrier to passive transport is functionally domains. Finally, we used statistical data analyses to identify
rigid or soft is also closely related to the biophysical mechanism the most prominent features of FG domains that form the bar-
by which the NPC performs its function. Several biophysically rier to passive permeability.
inspired models have attempted over the years to explain how
the FG domains form the selective barrier to transport, stirring
up lively debate in the literature about their biophysical form Results
and behavior (Ribbeck and Görlich, 2002; Rout et al., 2003;
Peters, 2005; Lim et al., 2006; Patel et al., 2007; Zilman et al., Quantification of NPC permeability in vivo
2007, 2010; Jovanovic-Talisman et al., 2009; Tetenbaum-No- To characterize the in vivo function of the NPC as a barrier
vatt and Rout, 2010; Yamada et al., 2010; Atkinson et al., 2013; to passive diffusion of macromolecules, we enhanced our
Kapinos et al., 2014; Tran et al., 2014; Vovk et al., 2016; Zahn et FRAP (Reits and Neefjes, 2001) assay of transport rates of
al., 2016). However, the evidence for these various mechanistic GFP fusion proteins (Timney et al., 2006; Lord et al., 2015),
58 JCB • Volume 215 • NumBer 1 • 2016
Downloaded
from
http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/215/1/57/1596505/jcb_201601004.pdf
by
guest
on
05
December
2025
making it substantially more automated and quantitative by GFP-PrA (Fig. 2 B) is negligible compared with the 27-fold
integrating several cell biological measurements in a uni- difference in their ^ τ values. Therefore, we attribute most of
fied pipeline (Fig. 1 B). the increase in ^ τ to changes in the translocation efficiencies of
In each FRAP experiment, we expressed GFP-labeled the different substrates.
substrates in live cells, photobleached the cytoplasmic pool at
time t = 0, and measured the nuclear fluorescence over time. As Approximately cubic dependence extends
expected of Fick’s law applied to porous membranes (Renkin, over a wide range of molecular masses
1954), the levels of nuclear fluorescence decayed exponentially It was recently illustrated that passive nuclear permeability in
over time, following first-order kinetics with a characteristic yeast is observed on the timescale of hours for substrates with
time constant τ as the labeled substrate equilibrated between molecular masses of up to 230 kD (Popken et al., 2015), and
the nuclear volume V and the cytoplasmic volume V through we were curious whether or not the approximately cubic size
N C
N NPCs (Fig. 1 B). At the microscopic level, τ is the mean time- dependence extends to these larger substrates. Although our
span between two consecutive translocation events for a single time-resolved FRAP experiments were not practical over time
substrate macromolecule. In bulk, τ is proportional to t , the t scales >10 min, as cellular growth and new GFP synthesis even-
1/2 1/2
time of nuclear fluorescence levels: τ = t /ln2. tually becomes significant, we could estimate the mean trans-
1/2
To remove cell-to-cell variability in τ caused by fluctu- port time ^ τ of these larger substrates based on the nuclear to
ations in V , V , and N, we used our measurements of these cytoplasmic fluorescence ratio after equilibration reported in
N C
morphological features in each individual FRAP experiment to that study (Materials and methods). Importantly, our estimates
compute the normalized time constant ^ τ , the hypothetical value were not scaled in any way to fit our own data and were the
of τ in a typical cell with mean values of V = 4.8 fL, V = 60 fL, result of a straightforward and nonparameterized transforma-
N C
and n = 161 NPCs, as well as the inversely related permeability tion to estimate the exponential decay rate. We plotted the re-
coefficient p of a single NPC, specified in units of molecules per sulting ^ τ values against the molecular masses of the combined
second per NPC per micromole, equivalent to 1.86 × 10−6 cm/s, dataset of 14 substrates ranging in molecular mass from 27
as explained in detail in Materials and methods and in Fig. 1 B to 230 kD. Strikingly, the same approximately cubic relation
(Timney et al., 2006; Lord et al., 2015). We repeated each mea- that we observed in our own data applies over this combined
surement between 13 and 59 times per condition and computed dataset, and with a much better confidence interval than if we
the mean and 95% confidence intervals for both ^ τ and p. used either of the datasets alone (Fig. 3 B). Because passive
diffusion rates may vary for macromolecules of similar molec-
A gradual and approximately cubic ular mass, we also examined two fusion proteins in which GFP
dependence on molecular mass was attached to either one or two domains of the completely
With this time-resolved FRAP assay, we examined passively unrelated Protein G from Streptococcus (GFP-1PrG and GFP-
diffusing proteins between 27 and 67 kD in mass, spanning the 2PrG), but their passive diffusion rates were consistent with the
often-cited molecular mass size threshold to passive transport measurements of similarly sized GFP-xPrA molecules, within
(Fig. 2 A). These substrates each comprised a GFP attached 7 kD (Fig. 3, A and B). We conclude that the barrier to passive
by a short linker to between zero and six repeats of the 7-kD diffusion lacks any fixed molecular mass threshold and can be
Protein A (PrA) domain and are termed GFP-xPrA in the re- predicted remarkably well based on molecular mass within the
mainder of this paper (with x denoting the number of PrA size range from 27 to 230 kD, at least to first approximation.
repeats). Measurements of permeability coefficients p and nor-
malized time constants ^ τ were acquired from some 236 WT Molecular shape has limited effect on
cells (Fig. 2, C–E; and Video 1), each expressing one of the six passive diffusion
differently sized GFP-xPrA substrates. To assess the effects of molecular shape on passive transport
Passive permeability decreased for substrates with in- rates, we first determined the level of molecular asymmetry for
creasing molecular masses, as expected (Fig. 2 E). However, each of the labeled substrates in our 27–67 kD dataset and com-
we did not observe any sharp cutoff in leakage at any specific puted their geometric shapes using three independent methods
threshold. Rather, we observed a strikingly simple functional (Fig. 3 C and Fig. S1 A): (1) analytical centrifugation was used
relationship, in which ^ τ increases with molecular mass [propor- to measure the sedimentation coefficient of each substrate, from
tional to protein volume (Fischer et al., 2004)] to the power of which we calculated S /S values, which increase with increas-
max
3.8 ± 1.0 at the 95% confidence intervals (Fig. 3 A). Hence, ing molecular asymmetry (Erickson, 2009); (2) dynamic-light
although the 27-kD GFP equilibrated in a matter of seconds scattering (DLS; Schmitz, 1990) was used to measure diffusion
(^ τ = 15 ± 1.4 s), the 67-kD GFP-6PrA substrate equilibrated on coefficients and the inversely related Stokes radii to provide an
the timescale of minutes (^ τ = 413 ± 92 s); a substantially slower independent validation of the measured sedimentation coeffi-
rate, yet well within the time scale of biologically relevant pro- cients; and (3) small-angle x-ray scattering (SAXS) was used
cesses, including the division time (1.25–2 h) of yeast cells. to most directly compute the shape of the enclosing envelope of
each substrate. All three methods were in outstanding agreement
Passive transport rates decrease because with each other (Fig. 3 C). Therefore, we could also rely on the
of reduced translocation efficiency sedimentation coefficients for the 110–230 kD dataset (Popken
The increase in the value of ^ τ for each substrate could be a result et al., 2015) to quantify the level of asymmetry of these larger
of an increasing diffusion time between consecutive substrate substrates based on their S /S values (Fig. 3 D). The shapes
max
encounters with the NPC, a decreased translocation probability of all molecules in the dataset were computed based on either
per each such encounter (the transport efficiency), or a com- their SAXS envelopes for the smaller substrates or their S /S
max
bination of both. However, the 1.6-fold decrease in the diffu- values for the larger ones (Fig. 3 D; and Materials and meth-
sion coefficients in solution from the 27-kD GFP to the 67-kD ods). The GFP-xPrA and -xPrG molecules elongated gradually
Simple rules for passive diffusion through the NPC • Timney et al. 59
Downloaded
from
http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/215/1/57/1596505/jcb_201601004.pdf
by
guest
on
05
December
2025
Figure 2. The relationship between molecular size (and shape) and in vivo diffusion of free proteins. (A) Passively diffusing reporter macromolecules
used in this study, showing their molecular mass, in vitro diffusion constants (D) measured using DLS, and sedimentation coefficients (S) measured from
sucrose gradient centrifugation. (B) Measured diffusion constant (D) in solution plotted against molecular mass and sedimentation coefficients (inset), ±SEM.
(C) Images of representative single cell’s FRAP experiments (bottom) of six different-sized substrates in WT yeast cells. Bars, 1 µm. The nucleus, cytoplasm,
and vacuole of the top cell is indicated. Nuclear fluorescence is plotted after normalizing each exponential fit between 2 (at t = 0) and 1 (at t = ∞; top).
(D) Diffusion curves from all such measurements of WT cells for the different-sized reporters, normalized as in C. (E) Population distributions of permeability
coefficients for the different reporters as a function of their size. Each dot indicates the computed permeability coefficient for a single cell.
from 27 to 67 kD with the addition of multiple PrA units, with molecular mass of a substrate determines its passive diffusion
S /S values increasing from 1.15 to 1.35 (Fig. 3, C and D). rates, regardless of its particular shape geometry.
max
However, this trend did not persist for the larger substrates up
to 230 kD, which had much lower S max /S values of 1.05–1.10, Compatibility of a soft barrier with
indicating an estimated 1.5:1 ratio between their long and short previously proposed models of transport
axes (Erickson, 2009) and a diameter of ∼10 nm for the 230-kD Several mechanistic models of the transport system assume that
GFP-5MBP substrate. Hence, the substrates in the combined large macromolecules are excluded from the NPC due to lack of
datasets have a wide variety of shapes, and the smallest and space. The “aqueous channel” model suggests that passive trans-
largest substrates are also the most globular. If those shape dif- port is restricted to a relatively narrow aqueous channel with pore
ferences affected passive transport to a significant degree, we radius r, with estimates of r ranging from 4.4 to 6.1 nm (Keminer
0 0
would expect that the measured sedimentation coefficient S, and Peters, 1999). Under this assumption, passive diffusion rates
which is strongly affected by molecular shape, would be a bet- are expected to depend on molecular shape more strongly than
ter predictor of passive transport rates than S , the theoretical we observe in this study (Fig. 3 E). Moreover, although the mole-
max
sedimentation coefficient of a perfect sphere of the same mo- cules in the combined dataset have different shapes, several of the
lecular mass (Erickson, 2009), which completely lacks shape smallest and largest substrates in the full 27–230-kD range have
information. However, S is in fact better correlated with the an exceptionally low S /S ratio and can be treated as roughly
max max
measured passive diffusion rates than S (Fig. 3 E; and see also spherical particles (Fig. 3, C and D). For such particles, the dif-
Fig. S1 B regarding a similar analysis of the theoretical minimal fusion times through an aqueous pore would increase sharply
radius, which also lacks shape information). Hence, the overall beyond a well-defined size threshold (Renkin, 1954), which is
60 JCB • Volume 215 • NumBer 1 • 2016
Downloaded
from
http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/215/1/57/1596505/jcb_201601004.pdf
by
guest
on
05
December
2025
Figure 3. Effect of molecular mass on the ex-
ponential time constant ^ τ . (A) ^ τ Values plotted
as a function of the substrate molecular masses
in log-log or linear scale (inset), ±95% confi-
dence intervals. The fit to a power function is
shown in a solid bold line; the thin gray lines
indicate the power function at the 95% con-
fidence intervals of the fit. (B) ^ τ Values as a
function of the reporter molecular masses in
log-log or linear scale (inset) for the joint set
that includes our measurements as in A (blue)
and the normalized ^ τ values that we computed
for larger cargos, based on the reported ratio
between nuclear and cytoplasmic fluorescence
after incubation (Popken et al., 2015; red). The
fit to a power function is indicated as in A. (C,
top) The ratio between S , the sedimenta-
max
tion coefficient of a perfect sphere, and S, the
measured sedimentation coefficient, plotted
against the SAXS measured shape asymmetry.
(bottom) The ratio between the measured sed-
imentation coefficient and the measured diffu-
sion coefficient ± 95% confidence intervals,
plotted against molecular mass. According to
the theory of sedimentation, S/D ∼ molecu-
lar mass (Erickson, 2009). (D) S /S ratios,
max
which are correlated with shape asymmetry
plotted for reporter molecules of different
molecular masses for the joint dataset as in B
and C ± 95% confidence intervals. Enclosing
envelopes (yellow surface representation) com-
puted from either SAXS measurements for each
substrate in our dataset, or modeled based on
the S /S values in the Popken et al. (2015)
max
datasets, using the crystallographic models of
each of their GFP, PrA, and MBP subunits (Ma-
terials and methods). (E) Theoretical S and
max
measured S sedimentation coefficients plotted
as a function of τ in log-log scale. The fits of
S and S to a power function of τ are shown
max
in solid magenta and orange lines, respec-
tively. (F) Same as inset of B, with a best fit to a
theoretical model of an aqueous pore (Renkin,
1954) shown in solid magenta line.
inconsistent with the data (Fig. 3 F; complete analysis in Materi- Comparison to Brownian dynamics
als and methods). The aqueous channel model is also inconsistent simulations of passive diffusion
with microscopy studies in permeabilized cells (Ma et al., 2012). To test whether our observations can be explained by an entropy-
Similarly, a sievelike hydrogel with a certain characteristic pore driven model of transport, we simulated the passive transport
size (Ribbeck and Görlich, 2001; Frey and Görlich, 2007; Mohr system using Brownian dynamics simulations (Ermak and
et al., 2009) or a collection of narrow pores (Mohr et al., 2009; McCammon, 1978), as described in detail in the Materials
Eibauer et al., 2015) are expected to result in a more well-defined and methods. We modeled the major system components: the
size threshold and be more sensitive to substrate shape, which NPC, the flexible FG repeats that are anchored to its scaffold,
would affect the likelihood of permeating narrow pores. Other the passively diffusing substrates, the cytoplasmic volume,
models of passive transport are expected to depend more strongly and the nuclear volume (Fig. 4 A). The chains of FG repeat
on molecular mass (i.e., molecular volume; Fischer et al., 2004) domains were modeled as flexible strings of beads with each
than on substrate geometry. Specifically, several models assume a bead representing a single repeat, based on increasing evi-
“virtual gate” that depends on entropic exclusion rather than on a dence indicating that FG domains are highly disordered, lack
geometric constriction (Rout et al., 2000, 2003; Lim et al., 2006; secondary structure, and have broad distributions of radii of
Hough et al., 2015; Sakiyama et al., 2016; Zahn et al., 2016). In gyration and end-to-end distances; this representation is con-
such an entropy-driven barrier, substrates with larger molecular sistent with many recent findings (Denning et al., 2003; Lim et
mass or volume cause a strain on the system by restricting the al., 2006; Peleg et al., 2011; Hough et al., 2015; Milles et al.,
conformational freedom of the disordered FG domains that are 2015; Lemke, 2016; Raveh et al., 2016; Sakiyama et al., 2016;
anchored to the NPC scaffold, resulting in a size-dependent en- Vovk et al., 2016; Zahn et al., 2016) and the classic entro-
tropic penalty on their passive diffusion. pic spring model of polymers (van der and Maarel, 2008). To
Simple rules for passive diffusion through the NPC • Timney et al. 61
Downloaded
from
http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/215/1/57/1596505/jcb_201601004.pdf
by
guest
on
05
December
2025
gather sufficient statistics about each substrate, we generated mutant strains that includes truncated FG domains from all 11
20,000 independent trajectories on a Linux computer cluster yeast FG nups at least once, in various combinations (Fig. 5 A
(Materials and methods). Video 2 shows a sample simulation and Table S2). As a positive control for elevated permeability,
trajectory with substrate macromolecules of various molecu- we used the previously published Δnup170 strain (Shulga et
lar masses and their occasional translocation between the cy- al., 2000). For practicality, we first narrowed our investiga-
toplasm and the nucleus. tion to just the GFP-2PrA and GFP-4PrA substrates, which
To directly compare our simulations with the empirical bracket the often-stated ∼40-kD diffusion limit. For these
measurements of ^ τ , we also computed the simulated ^ τ values strains, single-cell FRAP measurements were combined, as
for each of the different substrate macromolecules directly from before. These permeability measurements of 674 single-cell
the simulations (Fig. 4 B). We used the microscopic definition of measurements are summarized in Fig. 5, B and C. Curiously,
τ as the time interval between consecutive translocations across the permeability of most strains was not greatly increased with
the NE (Fig. S2, A and B) and normalized this value to account respect to either substrate. This includes even the “maximally
for differences in the cytoplasmic volume, the nuclear volume, deleted” mutants, NΔFGCΔFGnsp1ΔFG and NΔFGCΔFGnup100ΔFG-
and the number of NPCs, as with the empirical ^ τ values (Mate- nup145ΔFG, which each lack roughly half of the FG mass of the
rials and methods). As expected of a soft and stochastic filtering WT NPC (Fig. 5 B; Strawn et al., 2004). In sharp contrast, the
mechanism, the interval times between consecutive transloca- nup116ΔFG strain was 2.7–3.8-fold leakier than the WT strain,
tions were widely distributed (Fig. S2 B). Similar to the empir- even though Nup116 is a minimally deleted mutant for which
ical data, the mean translocation time increased gradually with FG repeat domain contributes less than ∼10% of the NPC’s
molecular mass, and remarkably, it could also be approximated FG mass. Similarly, truncation of the FG domain of Nup100
by a cubic function of molecular mass, closely resembling the (a Nup116 paralog), either individually or in combination
relationship that we observed experimentally after scaling the with other FG nups, resulted in 1.5–2.0-fold increase in per-
⏞
simulated τ by a uniform constant factor to account for model- meability to at least one of the substrates (Fig. 5 C). All other
ing inaccuracies (Fig. 4 B). Significant changes to the density strains except the nup49ΔFGnup57ΔFG strain were only 1.0–1.5-
of FG domains in the NPC (Fig. 4 C), in the cohesiveness of fold leakier than the WT strain to either the GFP-2PrA or the
FG domains (Fig. 4 D), or to the dimensions of the NPC itself GFP-4PrA substrates. Hence, the NPC passive permeability
(Fig. S2 D) had gradual effects on size-dependent filtering in barrier is remarkably resilient to some extensive deletions of
our simulations, with a stronger effect over the baseline levels FG domains, whereas deletions of certain barrier-forming FG
of passive diffusion rates of all substrates (i.e., the plot is verti- domains, such as those of Nup116 and Nup100 (and to a lesser
cally shifted along the y axis) but a much more gradual tuning extent, Nup49 and Nup57) seem to play a disproportionate
of the relative size selectivity of different substrates (i.e., the role on passive permeability.
slope of the fitted power functions in Fig. 4, C and D, does not
change significantly when plotted in log-log scale). Hence, al- Deletion of barrier-forming FG domains
though cohesive interactions and precise optimizations of the has a uniform effect on substrates of
density of FG domains and the pore size could serve to fine- different sizes
tune the passive barrier, they are not required for recapitulating As barrier-forming FG domains are deleted from the NPC,
the fundamental properties of its function. We conclude that a we may expect either that passive permeability would in-
soft barrier to passive transport is consistent with an entropy- crease more significantly for larger substrates than for
driven model of the NPC. smaller substrates or, alternatively, that the deletion of these
domains may increase the diffusion rates of both small and
Relating the kinetics and the free energy large substrates uniformly. To test the effect of FG domain
barrier to passive diffusion deletion on substrates of different sizes, we chose a subset
From the spatial density distributions of the different macro- of four mutant strains that covered truncated FG domains
molecules in our simulations, we computed their free-energy from nine of the FG nups, including Nup116 and Nup100.
landscapes as a function of their position along the NPC (Fig. 4, We collected single-cell FRAP measurements (Fig. 6 A)
E and F; Materials and methods). As expected, the magnitude over the entire set of six labeled substrates (covering the
of the free-energy barrier (ΔG
passive
) increased slowly (sublin- molecular mass range 27–67 for passive diffusion) and for
early) with molecular mass (Fig. 4 F). In agreement with tran- each of these strains. This exploration resulted in 29 sub-
^
sition state theory, the simulated ^ o values are exponentially strate–strain combinations, comprising 792 individual cell
related to ΔG (Fig. S2 C), fitting a slightly modified form of the measurements. Again, the leakiest strains for the full dataset
Eyring-Polanyi equation with R2 = 0.999 (Eyring, 1935). of substrates had either the nup116ΔFG or nup100ΔFG trun-
Hence, our simulations suggest that the kinetics of passive dif- cations, whereas the basal permeability of the maximally
fusion may be modeled as an elementary chemical reaction with deleted NΔFGCΔFGnsp1ΔFG strain remained statistically indis-
a single reaction step and a single transition state. tinguishable from the WT strain (Fig. 6 B). At any rate, dele-
tions had a uniform effect on both small and large substrates
Measurements in mutant strains reveal compared with the WT strain, regardless of the general level
disproportionate role for different of leakiness; that is, the slope of the fitted power function
FG domains for each of the strains is attenuated only slightly or not at all
To investigate empirically how the composition of the FG do- in Fig. 6 B (within the statistical confidence intervals), and
mains that comprise the permeability barrier affects the NPC’s these slopes describe the extent of size-dependent filtering
permeability, we have used a comprehensive combinatorial across substrates of different molecular masses. Notably,
FG domain deletion catalog (Strawn et al., 2004; Terry and this empirical result is again consistent with our simula-
Wente, 2007; Adams et al., 2015). We selected a subset of 12 tion model, in which massive deletions of FG repeats had a
62 JCB • Volume 215 • NumBer 1 • 2016
Downloaded
from
http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/215/1/57/1596505/jcb_201601004.pdf
by
guest
on
05
December
2025
Figure 4. Thermodynamics and kinetics analysis of simulated passive diffusion. (A) Coarse-grained model of the passive diffusion through the NPC, with
the NPC modeled as a cylindrical scaffold, with flexible FG repeats anchored to its walls. (B) Simulated and experimental exponential time constants of
transport ± 95% confidence intervals, plotted as a function of molecular mass, with solid lines showing fits to power functions. The absolute values of the
simulated time constants are scaled by a single constant value, to allow direct comparison with the experimental data, but without affecting the slope or
the relative magnitude of the data points in any way. (C) As in B for simulated NPCs depleted in FG chains from 100% (top) to 50% (bottom). (D, top) As
in B and C for FG domains with increasing cohesiveness. The legend indicates the interaction force k between pairs of FG motifs in units of kT/Å over a
range of 6 Å. Results did not change significantly for k values in the range 0.0–1.7 kT/Å. (bottom) Energy for the same molecules and cohesiveness level
as in the top panel; see also F. (E) The free energy barrier for diffusing macromolecules of different molecular masses in units of kT (color bar), along a
cross section of the NPC going parallel to the NE through the NPC central axis (x axis) and from the nucleus to the cytoplasm (Z axis). (F) The free energy
barrier projected along the z axis, by integrating over a tube of radius 12 nm about the NPC central axis. The top panel shows the free energy barrier
as a function of Z for each substrate; the bottom panel shows the magnitude of the barrier as a function of molecular mass ± 95% confidence intervals.
Simple rules for passive diffusion through the NPC • Timney et al. 63
Downloaded
from
http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/215/1/57/1596505/jcb_201601004.pdf
by
guest
on
05
December
2025
Figure 5. Permeability of mutant strains. (A) Combinatorially deleted strains used in this study; deleted nups in each strain are indicated by white circles.
Bottom left illustrates that each diagram represents the right half of a cross section of a diagrammatic NPC, where R is the radial distance from the pore
radial axis, and the z axis denotes vertical proximity to the cytoplasm (positive values) or the nucleus (negative values). These approximate FG nup positions
are drawn according to the localization map for the FG nup C termini used in Table S2 of reference (Alber et al., 2007a). FG nup diameters are estimated
for visualization purposes using Eq. 6 in reference (Marsh and Forman-Kay, 2010). (B) Measured NPC permeability coefficients (p) in different strains for
GFP-2PrA (molecular mass 40.7 kD) and GFP-4PrA (53.6 kD). Each black dot is from one single-cell FRAP measurement. Red dots are the mean for the
GFP-2PrA or GFP-4PrA substrate in that strain. Δnup170 was measured as positive control for a previously published “leaky strain” (Shulga et al., 2000).
(C) Permeability of GFP-2PrA versus GFP-4PrA in the different strains relative to the permeability of the WT strain (±SEM). Strains lacking Nup100 or
Nup116 GLFG domains are marked red, the nup49ΔFGnup57ΔFG strain green, WT black, Δnup170 gray, and all others blue.
relatively mild effect on the size-dependent filtering and a suggests that the density of certain FG repeats can be used
stronger effect on their overall basal permeability (compare to fine-tune the passive barrier. This result enables us to
with changes in slope and in the baseline of the transport more formally define the basal permeability of each mutant
times in Fig. 5 F). This observation provides additional sup- strain as a strain-specific multiplier p /p relative to the
strain WT
port for the model of entropic exclusion from the NPC and WT, a quantity that applies uniformly to different substrates.
64 JCB • Volume 215 • NumBer 1 • 2016
Downloaded
from
http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/215/1/57/1596505/jcb_201601004.pdf
by
guest
on
05
December
2025
Figure 6. Size-dependent permeability in four FG deletion strains. (A) An example of NPC permeability assays from representative single cells expressing
GFP-2PrA, from FG deletion and control strains. Bars, 1 µm. The permeability of Δnup170 was measured as positive control for a previously published
leaky strain (Shulga et al., 2000). (B) Strains in which mean transport times (^ τ ) were calculated for all six different-sized substrates are plotted ± 95%
confidence intervals as a function of the reporter molecular masses in log-log scale, these being 29 (GFP), 34 (GFP-1PrA), 41 (GFP-2PrA), 47 (GFP-3PrA),
54 (GFP-4PrA), and 67 kD (GFP-6PrA). As GFP-xPrG data were only collected for WT cells, only GFP-xPrA data are included in this figure, for more direct
comparisons. The solid line in each subplot indicates the fit to a power function. For the mutant strains, the WT fit is superimposed as a red line. The func-
tional form of each power function is indicated along with the 95% confidence intervals for the power exponent.
Changes in passive permeability cannot FG flavors, in which we tagged key transport receptors and FG
be explained by indirect effects on the nups, to survey for global changes to the quantity or distribu-
transport system tion of the machinery of nucleocytoplasmic transport. Namely,
Many factors in the cellular biology of the mutant strains might these strains were WT, the leaky nup116ΔFG strain, and the mas-
have influenced our measurements of passive permeability. We sively deleted, nonleaky nsp1ΔFG and NΔFGCΔFGnsp1ΔFG strains.
first assessed whether passive permeability might be influenced In these strains, we tagged the genomic copy of the transport
by changes in the following general properties of the transport receptors Kap95-mCherry, Crm1-GFP, Kap123-GFP, and Ntf2-
system: (1) NPC quantities; (2) inefficient targeting of truncated GFP or the nups Nup116-GFP, Ndc1-GFP, and Nup170-GFP
FG nups to the NPC; (3) increased pools of transport receptors and acquired images of the steady-state distributions of each,
at the NPC; and (4) changes in the rates of facilitated transport. in all four strains (Fig. S3, bottom). Using assisted automated
We selected key strains that covered a range of phenotypes and image analysis, measurements of nuclear, cytoplasmic, and
Simple rules for passive diffusion through the NPC • Timney et al. 65
Downloaded
from
http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/215/1/57/1596505/jcb_201601004.pdf
by
guest
on
05
December
2025
(where possible) nuclear rim fluorescence of 9,621 such cells FG domain features that may affect passive permeability (Table
were obtained. The mean magnitude of change in each measure- S3). We included such features as the total mass and number of
ment, relative to WT, is summarized in Fig. S3. Importantly, we deleted FG domains; sequence features that describe the flavor
found that most strains changed minimally in their NPC abun- of deleted FG domains (GLFG/FXFG/other; i.e., their amino
dance and that therefore these changes did not substantially acid composition, hydrophobicity levels, fraction of charged
contribute to our permeability measurements. We also found residues, and net charge); and geometrical features that describe
that Nup116-GFP targets efficiently to the NPC, even when the approximate spatial localization of different FG nups rel-
truncated, suggesting that there are not overwhelming changes ative to the cytoplasmic and nuclear end of the NPC, despite
in NPC stoichiometry in most FG deletion strains. Finally, we progress in mapping the vertebrate NPC (Eibauer et al., 2015;
found no substantial changes in quantities of fluorescent trans- Kosinski et al., 2016), we cannot use these maps because of
port receptors at the nuclear rim in any strain (other than for differences in scale and structure with the yeast NPC (Yang et
Ntf2), and by surveying the most abundant transport receptors, al., 1998), and so instead, we used our previously reported map,
we have sampled a significant fraction of facilitated transport. which is at a level of resolution sufficient for the purposes of the
How facilitated transport has been perturbed in these current study (Alber et al., 2007b).
strains is a matter of particular interest, at least insofar as we can From the entire list of 33 features, we were unable to iden-
examine in this study, as well as how it contrasts with effects on tify a single feature that correlated well with the observed vari-
passive transport. We did observe some changes in the nucleus/ ance in basal permeability among the different mutant strains
cytoplasm (N/C) distributions of soluble transport receptors, (Fig. 7 A and Fig. S5). For example, consistent with previous
illustrating that the cycles of facilitated transport are sensitive studies (Strawn et al., 2004; Terry and Wente, 2007; Popken et
to the loss of particular FG domains more than others. Infer- al., 2015), the total FG mass deleted from the NPC did not cor-
ring the meaning of some of these changes is beyond the scope relate with the change in passive transport rates (Fig. 7 A). To
of this study, considering the complexity of the system. None- identify combinations of features that might better explain the
theless, it is perhaps unsurprising that the distribution of Ntf2- observed interstrain variability in basal permeability while min-
GFP would be affected by the loss of Nsp1 FG domains, as imizing the risk of data overfitting, we used the Least Absolute
the interaction between and importance of these two proteins is Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LAS SO) method for multi-
well characterized (Bayliss et al., 1999, 2002). Interestingly, the variate statistical regression (Tibshirani, 1996), combined with
strain that showed the most notable effect on facilitated trans- principal component analysis (PCA; Jolliffe, 1982). To offset
port of the fluorescent transport receptors was the maximally concerns that the regression analysis may produce a model
deleted NΔFGCΔFGnsp1ΔFG strain, in spite of having little effect that overfits the specific data used for training the model, we
on passive transport. Though technically more challenging (be- repeated the regression analysis over a smaller dataset, which
cause of far faster equilibration rates), we therefore examined included only measurements with the GFP-2PrA and GFP-
the dynamic rate of Kap123-GFP exchange between nucleus 4PrA constructs. Reassuringly, similar features and weights
and cytoplasm, using FRAP, similar to the method we used to were selected by the model from the smaller dataset (Fig. S6
assay passive transport. We found that nucleocytoplasmic ex- A), or when we removed either of the strains with the great-
change of Kap123 decreased by 72% in NΔFGCΔFGnsp1ΔFG (Figs. est effect on basal permeability, nup116ΔFG and nup100ΔFG,
S3 and S4). In strong contrast to the permeability results, ex- from the dataset (Fig. S6 B), or lastly, to account for potential
change of Kap123 decreased only modestly in nup116ΔFG and uncertainty in the copy number of certain FG nups (Mi et al.,
nsp1ΔFG and had little effect on nuclear rim fluorescence of 2015), when we assumed a uniform stoichiometry of FG nups
transport receptors in these strains, even though nup116ΔFG has at the NPC (Fig. S6 C).
the largest permeability to passive transport (compare Fig. 6 B). The combined PCA/LAS SO model explains the observed
This discrepancy may be a result of loss of docking sites for variation in basal transport rates between strains with an R2
Kap123, consistent with decreased rim intensity for Kap123 in value of 0.90 (compare Fig. 7 B with the fits of individual fea-
that strain (Fig. S3) and with recent kinetic models that sug- tures in Fig. S5). Importantly, this statistical regression model
gested that facilitated diffusion is rate-limited by the availability has a straightforward and intuitive interpretation, pointing at
of docking sites rather than by transport efficiency (Kim and two groups of features of FG Nups that in combination have the
Elbaum, 2013b). Overall, these results show that different FG greatest effect on passive transport (Fig. 7 C). The first group
nups have a very different effect on passive and facilitated trans- consists of positional features of our medium-resolution model
port, indicating distinct functions for different FG nups in pas- of the NPC (Alber et al., 2007b). The second group of features
sive versus facilitated transport. is related to the ratio of net charge to hydropathy score in the FG
domains that were deleted from the NPC. Specifically, we con-
Direct effects on passive permeability clude from our model that FG domains that are both anchored
as a result of FG nups positions, charge, close to the cytoplasmic end of the NPC (Fig. S7 A) and have
and hydropathy a high ratio of net charge to hydropathy (Fig. S7 B) contribute
Because changes in passive permeability among strains (Figs. most to the passive barrier, most notably Nup100, Nup116, and
5 and 6) could not be explained by indirect effects such as possibly the adjacent Nup42, Nup49, and Nup57 (Fig. 7 D).
changes in NPC quantities or the rates of facilitated transport
(Figs. S3 and S4), we set out to identify the biochemical and
geometrical properties of specific FG domains that might di- Discussion
rectly affect passive permeability. For each strain, we computed
its basal permeability to passive transport relative to the WT NPCs facilitate the retention of nuclear and cytoplasmic fac-
strain (p /p ), averaging over all substrates for which mea- tors in their appropriate subcellular compartments while tightly
strain WT
surements were taken. We then collated an exhaustive list of 33 regulating their timely exchange. However, the precise relation
66 JCB • Volume 215 • NumBer 1 • 2016
Downloaded
from
http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/215/1/57/1596505/jcb_201601004.pdf
by
guest
on
05
December
2025
Figure 7. No single factor is a good predictor of NPC permeability. (A) Effect of select features on pore basal permeability (p/p ) relative to the WT strain.
WT
Shown are the four features with the highest absolute correlation. Plots for all 33 features are shown in Fig. S5. (B) Predicted basal permeability (p/p ) of
WT
combinatorial deletion strains (±SEM) relative to the WT strain according to the LASS O statistical regression model versus the experimental measurements
for each strain. (C) Aggregate contribution of features related to either the ratio of net charge to hydropathy or position to the LAS SO regression model.
(D) p/p of individual nups relative to the WT strain according to the regression model. The nups are positioned based on their proximity to the cytoplasm
WT
(z axis) and their distance from the NPC radial axis, as observed in immuno-EM maps (Alber et al., 2007b). The prediction for Nup159 should be assigned
lower confidence because of the unusual negative charge and architecture of Nup159.
between the size and shape of macromolecules and their passive be interpreted as residual leakage beyond a well-defined cut-
translocation rates, as well as the role of different FG nups in off (Kirli et al., 2015) but rather as an intrinsic property of the
establishing the barrier, is still poorly understood. In this study, NPC filtering mechanism.
we provide the most rigorous quantitative characterization of
in vivo size-dependent passive diffusion rates to date, based on Suitability of in vivo measurements and
measurements in both WT and mutant yeast strains (Figs. 1, 2, labeled probes
and 3). Our results clearly support the model of a soft barrier to Our measurements were performed in live yeast cells, for which
passive diffusion (Fig. 1 A) and refute the prevailing paradigm we checked for changes in NPC quantity, composition, and po-
of a rather firm barrier at any well-defined size threshold, in- tential clogging with soluble transport receptors (Figs. S3 and
cluding the oft-cited 30–60-kD threshold (Keminer and Peters, S4). The measured permeability coefficient of the GFP sub-
1999; Mohr et al., 2009; Ma et al., 2012; Christie et al., 2016; strate was 1.1 ± 0.04 molecules/s/NPC/µM (Fig. 2 E), which
Knockenhauer and Schwartz, 2016; Musser and Grünwald, is comparable to results from in vitro studies of permeabilized
2016; Schmidt and Görlich, 2016). Our results provide mecha- HeLa cells (Ribbeck and Görlich, 2001; Mohr et al., 2009; Ma
nistic context to recent large-scale screens of nuclear compart- et al., 2012) and NPCs isolated from Xenopus oocytes (Kiskin
mentalization, which indicated that relatively large proteins, et al., 2003). However, we prefer the use of in vivo measure-
larger than the 30–60-kD cutoff, are often equally partitioned ments to quantify the operating parameters of the nucleocyto-
between the nucleus and the cytoplasm, similar to smaller pro- plasmic system, considering that a range of variables in in vitro
teins (Wühr et al., 2015). Alternatively, such proteins are re- systems, such as the lack of competition with other transport re-
tained in just one compartment by either binding to even larger ceptors (Timney et al., 2006; Zilman et al., 2010), RanGTP (Ma
molecular complexes, for which passive diffusion is expected et al., 2012, 2016; Lowe et al., 2015), and nonspecific interac-
to be negligible even if we assume a soft barrier (Wühr et al., tions with the cellular milieu (Tetenbaum-Novatt et al., 2012;
2015) or are actively removed from the other compartment by Hough et al., 2015), were clearly demonstrated to affect the bio-
facilitated diffusion (Kirli et al., 2015). These results indicate physical state of NPCs in general and passive diffusion in par-
that the slow diffusion of much larger substrates across the ticular. These variables have different effects on small and large
NPC (Wang and Brattain, 2007; Popken et al., 2015) cannot macromolecules (Lowe et al., 2015) and are therefore likely to
Simple rules for passive diffusion through the NPC • Timney et al. 67
Downloaded
from
http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/215/1/57/1596505/jcb_201601004.pdf
by
guest
on
05
December
2025
introduce a significant bias for characterizing the size threshold of their disordered and dynamic nature, this environment, the
for passive diffusion in vitro (Keminer and Peters, 1999; Mohr NPC’s central channel, is still permeable to macromolecules.
et al., 2009). The labeled GFP-xPrA substrates are appropriate For these macromolecules to pass through the NPC, they must
model substrates for passive diffusion in vivo because PrA and displace these domains, competing for the restricted available
GFP are both understood to be functionally inert in yeast, lack volume and restraining the FG domains’ conformations. This
nuclear localization and export signals, and do not interact with generates entropic repulsive forces shaping a free energy barrier
native yeast proteins (Gavin et al., 2002; Keilhauer et al., 2015). to passive diffusion (Fig. 4, E and F); because these forces are
Moreover, they are more representative of cellular proteins than caused by displacement, they therefore scale with the volume of
dextran molecules (Keminer and Peters, 1999), because FG re- the diffusing macromolecules.
peats are likely to form weak nonspecific interactions even with
mixtures of inert proteins like GFP and PrA (Tetenbaum-Novatt Simulations of passive diffusion are robust
et al., 2012; Hough et al., 2015; Raveh et al., 2016). to changes in the model details
The NPC is a remarkably resilient machine that can withstand
Substrate determinants of extensive deletions and maintain a similar function in a range of
passive diffusion divergent eukaryotes. Although the NPCs of different organisms
Our results indicate that passive diffusion rates depend most vary in their spatial architecture and in FG nup composition,
strongly on the substrate molecular mass, that is, its volume we incorporated within our model only the basic properties that
(Fischer et al., 2004; Fig. 3, A and B), and not so much on are sufficient to recapitulate the in vivo properties of the NPC,
molecular shape asymmetry (Fig. 3 E). Various other substrate as observed in all eukaryotes. To avoid bias from uncertain
features have been previously proposed to affect passive dif- model details, we have attempted to minimize the complexity
fusion (Naim et al., 2009; Colwell et al., 2010; Tagliazucchi of our model. Our current model does not attempt to include
et al., 2013; Goryaynov and Yang, 2014). Indeed, substrates of a high-resolution physical representation of the NPC, but it
similar size and shape in our dataset did show relatively small includes all the major system components that are required to
but statistically significant variation in their passive transport form an entropically driven gate to passive diffusion—namely,
rates (compare GFP-xPrA and GFP-xPrG substrates in Fig. 3 A a cylindrical pore filled with highly flexible polymers. To verify
and Table S3). Nonetheless, except in relatively extreme cases that this simplification did not skew our results, we tested the
(such as the incorporation of many surface hydrophobic res- resilience of our model over a wide range of model parameters
idues into diffusion substrates [Naim et al., 2009]), our data and showed that such changes, including substantial changes
suggest that molecular volume is the most prominent determi- to the density of the FG domains (Fig. 4 C), their cohesiveness
nant of passive diffusion. (Fig. 4 D), and the dimensions of the NPC (Fig. S2 D) had a
limited effect on our results. Similarly, competition with trans-
Simple biophysical principles underlying port receptors or the functional arrangement of different types
size-selective passive diffusion of FG repeats may contribute to modulating this core function
Several of the proposed mechanistic models of transport posit (Vovk et al., 2016; Zahn et al., 2016) or contribute to other func-
that passively diffusing substrates are restricted by a well- tions such as facilitated diffusion, but are secondary to this en-
defined geometric barrier, such as a narrow aqueous pore tropic effect in forming the passive barrier itself.
(Keminer and Peters, 1999) or a sievelike saturated hydrogel Other approaches have been used to simulate the trans-
(Ribbeck and Görlich, 2001; Frey and Görlich, 2007; Mohr et port system using a generally higher level of model complexity
al., 2009). Therefore, passive diffusion is expected to be sensi- (Mincer and Simon, 2011; Moussavi-Baygi et al., 2011; Gha-
tive to substrate geometry and plummet at a well-defined size vami et al., 2016) than our present simulations. In these studies,
threshold as the substrate reaches the characteristic pore size, passive diffusion rates have been quantified only for a small
which is inconsistent with our data (Fig. 3, E and F). In con- number of relevant substrate sizes (Mincer and Simon, 2011;
trast, if the barrier to passive transport is formed because of Moussavi-Baygi et al., 2011) or they have focused on the sys-
entropic exclusion (Rout et al., 2000, 2003; Lim et al., 2006; tem thermodynamics rather than kinetics (Ghavami et al., 2016),
Sakiyama et al., 2016), the NPC is expected to sense the ex- prohibiting direct comparisons with our kinetic experimental
cluded volume occupied by the substrate, which is a simple and computational data. Nonetheless, the free energy barrier to
function of molecular mass/molecular volume (Fischer et al., passive diffusion inferred from our simulations increases to the
2004) rather than its specific geometry. If passive diffusion de- power of 0.67 of molecular mass (Fig. 4 D), which is consistent
pends on overall excluded volume, it is also expected to decay with the latter thermodynamic study, in spite of different model
more gradually compared with a geometric barrier. Our sim- details (Ghavami et al., 2014, 2016). This robustness to changes
ulation results confirm that such a soft virtual gate to passive in the model details is consistent both with the robustness of the
transport is formed by the anchoring of flexible polymers to a NPC to substantial genetic deletions (Strawn et al., 2004; Terry
cylindrical pore (Rout et al., 2000, 2003; Fig. 4 and Video 2), and Wente, 2007) and with how biomimetic nanopores contain-
in agreement with the overall size-dependent filtering proper- ing end-grafted FG domains recapitulate major properties of the
ties of the NPC observed in living cells (Fig. 4 B). Our experi- transport system (Jovanovic-Talisman et al., 2009).
mental measurements of passive diffusion in mutant strains are
remarkably consistent with our simulation results, showing that Properties of functional region for
the deletion of FG domains may increase the overall leakiness passive permeability
of a given strain, but it affects substrates of different sizes in Our results indicate that the passive barrier may be mainly
a similar way, thereby maintaining the relative size selectivity formed by a subset of FG nups (Fig. 7 D)—Nup116, Nup100,
of the NPC (Fig. 6 B). Simply put, the anchored FG domains Nup42, Nup49, and Nup57 (Fig. 7 D)—whereas facilitated
form a highly crowded environment in the NPC, but because transport may be more affected by deletions of another subset
68 JCB • Volume 215 • NumBer 1 • 2016
Downloaded
from
http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/215/1/57/1596505/jcb_201601004.pdf
by
guest
on
05
December
2025
of FG nups (Figs. S3 and S4). These results strongly support elaborate approaches that account for the increased interaction
the concept that the NPC has a higher-level arrangement of par- time of NTRs within the NPC, competition effects, availabil-
ticular FG repeats with distinct functionalities distributed by a ity of docking sites and differences between import and export
complex scaffold (Rout and Wente, 1994; Alber et al., 2007b; (Kopito and Elbaum, 2007; Zilman et al., 2007; Kim and El-
Patel et al., 2007; Yamada et al., 2010; Tu et al., 2013; Popken baum, 2013a; Tu et al., 2013). Facilitated diffusion also depends
et al., 2015). Indeed, truncating both Nup116 and Nup100 to- on unique properties of the interactions between NTRs and
gether is lethal in yeast (Iovine and Wente, 1997), and these two FG Nups, which were suggested to exchange rapidly (Hough
Nups were suggested to contribute to the passive barrier in the et al., 2015; Milles et al., 2015) through unique interaction
past (Hülsmann et al., 2012; Popken et al., 2015). It has been mechanisms (Raveh et al., 2016). Nonetheless, if we assume
recently suggested, based on simulation studies, that Nup116, that passive and facilitated diffusion proceed through the same
Nup100, Nup42, Nup49, and Nup57 participate in forming a physical conduit, we expect the free energy gain from inter-
dense region of FG domains within the central channel (Gha- actions between NTRs and FG Nups (ΔG
interaction
) to roughly
vami et al., 2014) and that the truncation of their FG domains counter ΔG
passive
. Because the latter increases only slowly (sub-
may affect the passive transport by disrupting this region, but linearly) with molecular mass (Fig. 4 F; see also Ghavami et al.,
not the spatial organization and the functions of other FG nups 2016), a relatively small number of interactions are expected to
that are projected out of the pore in these simulations (Popken facilitate the fast diffusion of relatively large cargo molecules.
et al., 2015). By applying statistical regression methods to our For example, according to the approximately cubic relation be-
^
results, we concluded that the FG nups contributing to passive tween molecular mass and ^ o (Fig. 3 B), we estimate the mean
permeability share two distinct properties: they are colocalized timespan between consecutive passive translocations of 4-MD
at the cytoplasmic end of the NPC central channel, and they mRNP complexes (Grünwald and Singer, 2010) to be 107 times
also all exhibit a high ratio of net charge to hydropathy score slower than for a 27-kD GFP molecule, an energy difference
(Figs. 7, S6, and S7). Interestingly, all of these FG nups are of 12–16 kT according to the Eyring-Polanyi relation (Fig. S2
also canonically GLFG nups, which were previously suggested C; Eyring, 1935). A barrier of this magnitude is not insignif-
to be functionally distinct from other FG nups (Yamada et al., icant, but it could be readily overcome by the binding energy
2010). However, our results indicate that their position near from a relatively small number of NTRs. Indeed, 4- to 5-MD
the cytoplasmic end of the central channel also seems oblig- mRNP complexes translocate through the NPC in merely 200
atory, as Nup145N, which also carries many GLFG motifs, ms (Grünwald and Singer, 2010; Lowe et al., 2015), and the fa-
has little contribution to the passive permeability barrier in our cilitated diffusion rates of ∼10-MD complexes of quantum dots
measurements. We note that despite this colocalization at the and NTRs crossed the NPC within a few seconds when bound
cytoplasmic end, the effect on entry and exit rates from the nu- to 20 NTR molecules and in less than a second when bound to
cleus seems to be identical, as the equilibrium ratio between 40 NTR molecules, respectively (Lowe et al., 2010). These data
nuclear and cytoplasmic fluorescence levels is insignificant in are consistent with the gradual overcoming of a surmountable
leaky strains (Fig. S8). energy barrier, as expected from both our empirical and compu-
GLFG domains are depleted of charged residues (Patel et tational results. At the other end of the size spectrum, the rather
al., 2007; Yamada et al., 2010; Adams et al., 2015; Schmidt and gradual decrease in the energy barrier with molecular mass also
Görlich, 2015), yet their overall net charge is in fact strongly explains why specialized NTRs are used even for some small
positive and their hydropathy score low compared with other macromolecules that are transported at high quantities, such as
FG repeat flavors (i.e., they are overall exceptionally hydro- the 25-kD Ran (Smith et al., 1998; Ribbeck and Görlich, 2001),
philic; Fig. S7, B and C). Moreover, although all FG repeats because the energy penalty for passive diffusion scales with the
appear to be disordered (Denning et al., 2003; Yamada et al., total volume of passive diffusers according to our model.
2010; Hough et al., 2015), high net charge and low hydropa- Understanding how the NPC forms such a soft barrier
thy are hallmarks of extreme protein disorder (Tcherkasskaya while facilitating active transport over this wide range of mo-
et al., 2003; Dunker et al., 2008; Fig. S4 B). This is surprising lecular sizes will be advanced significantly by the ongoing
because GLFG domains are assumed to be rather sticky and structural characterization of the NPC and its FG domains, par-
compact compared with other FG domains (Patel et al., 2007; ticularly those within critical locations of the NPC. Additional
Yamada et al., 2010; Schmidt and Görlich, 2015). It has also measurements and simulations that use such refined data will
been suggested that the high net charge of FG nups may con- illuminate the functional arrangement of the NPC that enables
tribute to interaction with the mostly acidic transport receptors the cell to maintain the proper flow of nucleocytoplasmic traffic.
(Tagliazucchi et al., 2013), perhaps helping to inhibit passive
diffusion through competition. Therefore, the role of highly
charged regions at the cytoplasmic end of the NPC in forming Materials and methods
the passive barrier needs to be further characterized in future
studies; for instance, by mutating charged residues or modulat- Plasmids
ing the hydrophobicity levels of these domains and by nuclear Plasmids were constructed by standard molecular biological meth-
magnetic resonance spectroscopy or SAXS. ods. DNA constructs were made for expression of eGFP C-terminally
tagged with one, two, three, four, or six repeats of the PrA domain
Implications of soft barrier on from Staphylococcus aureus. These GFP-xPrA genes were subcloned
facilitated diffusion either into the yeast constitutive expression plasmid pYX242 (EMD
In contrast to the relatively straightforward Eyring-Polanyi re- Millipore, discontinued) or as 6xHIS fusion genes into the bacterial
^
lation shown here between ^ o and ΔG
passive
(Eyring, 1935; Fig. expression plasmid pET28a (EMD Millipore). GFP-1PrG and -2PrG
S2 C), accurately relating the energy landscape for diffus- constructs were made similarly, as yeast and bacterial expression con-
ing through the NPC to transport kinetics may require more structs, by fusing to GFP either the C2 domain (for GFP-1PrG) or both
Simple rules for passive diffusion through the NPC • Timney et al. 69
Downloaded
from
http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/215/1/57/1596505/jcb_201601004.pdf
by
guest
on
05
December
2025
the C2 and C3 domains (for GFP-2PrG) from Streptococcus protein G based on edge detection of optimized images of the GFP channel (cy-
(Goward et al., 1990). For details of each plasmid, see Table S1. toplasm) and the mCherry channel (nucleus). Background-corrected,
mean fluorescence pixel intensities of the nucleus and cytoplasm over
Yeast strains time were obtained from the segmented regions, normalized to constant
FG deletion strains used in this study are derivatives of those described total cellular fluorescence to correct for photobleaching during image
in Strawn et al. (2004) and Terry and Wente (2007). For NPC perme- acquisition. As we were using a nonconfocal imaging system, cyto-
ability assays with these strains, their genomic copy of HTB2 was plasmic pixel measurements excluded the area near to the brighter nu-
tagged with mCherry. In a subset of these strains, genomic copies of cleus to minimize the effect of out-of-focus light. Conversely, nuclear
CRM1, KAP95, KAP123, NTF2, NUP116, NDC1, and NUP170 were measurements have negligible effect from cytoplasmic light intrusion,
C-terminally tagged with either GFP(S65T) or mCherry. Genomic tag- which is considerably darker than the nucleus during the most import-
ging cassettes were generated by PCR of either pKT355 (Sheff and ant part of the time course (and thus contributes very little signal). Note
Thorn, 2004), in the case of mCherry, or pFA6-GFP(S65T)-HIS MX6, that for the reverse experiment, in which the nucleus is bleached, it
for tagging with GFP (Longtine et al., 1998). Details of these strains is technically more challenging to target the smaller nucleus, and the
can be found in Table S2. nuclear pixel measurements are more affected by light haze from the
For all experiments, yeast strains were grown to early log phase bright surrounding cytoplasm.
in synthetic complete media containing 2% glucose. For live-cell mi-
croscopy, cells were attached to Con A–coated Matek dishes (Zenklu- Data integration for computing NPC permeability coefficients
sen et al., 2007), in which they were allowed to grow for up to 2 h In the experiments, we directly measured the nuclear fluorescence
before preparing a fresh plate. over time, the volume of the cytoplasm and the nucleus, and the
surface area of the NE. We show how these measurements can
FRAP assay of NPC permeability be combined to compute the permeability coefficient particular
Single yeast cell measurements of permeability were obtained using to each strain–substrate pair in units of molecules per second per
a substantially more quantitative adaption of a FRAP-based method NPC per micromole (or 1.86 × 10−6 cm/s; explained below in this
described by us (Lord et al., 2015). section). In the analysis, we assumed that the diffusion of GFP-
FRAP experiments were conducted on a DeltaVision deconvo- xPrA within the nucleus and cytoplasm is rapid, compared with
lution epifluorescence microscope (Applied Precision Ltd.) fitted with its exchange across the NE, and that the rates of mass transport
a spot-bleaching laser using a 100× 1.4 NA objective (Olympus). For across the envelope follow Fick’s first law. This approach is similar
each assay, a point within the cell was targeted with the bleaching laser, to that described by Peters and colleagues for their ex vivo single-
as far from the nucleus as possible. This point was illuminated for 1 s, channel experiments (Keminer and Peters, 1999; Kiskin et al., 2003).
during which time much of the cytoplasmic pool diffuses through that The first assumption is supported by the empirical observation that
illuminated area and is bleached, leaving a darkened cytoplasm and a equilibration times in each compartment are less than a second,
brighter nucleus. Occasionally, a second bleach would be necessary. whereas equilibration across the membrane is approximately sev-
Over the next 1–10 min, a time course of images of GFP and the Htb2- eral seconds to minutes. The second assumption is validated by the
mCherry nuclear marker were acquired, during which time the visi- decay in nuclear fluorescence following single exponential kinetics
ble nuclear and cytoplasmic GFP pools returned to a steady state of in the FRAP experiments.
approximately equal fluorescence intensities. Subsequently, a stack of Based on these assumptions, the flux of GFP (J) at any time,
GFP and Htb2-mCherry images were acquired in the z axis to obtain namely the net amount of substance flowing from the nucleus to the
the subcellular size and shape measurements necessary for quantitative cytoplasm through NPCs per time unit per membrane surface area unit,
analysis of the time course. is simply related to the nuclear (N) and cytoplasmic (C) concentrations
Images of the 3D image stack were deconvolved for a pseudo- of GFP by Fick’s first law applied to porous membranes:
confocal image series, and then the most focused image planes were
combined by maximum intensity projection. Nuclear, cytoplasmic, and J = ( C − N) ⋅ p, (1)
vacuolar regions were segmented by an automated process based on
edge detection of this projection, with these subcellular objects fitted where C and N are given in micromoles, p is a coefficient of permea-
to ellipses. Measurements of nuclear and cytoplasmic volumes and bility for the NE given in units of molecules per second per NPC per
surface areas were obtained from these 2D ellipses by approximating micromole, particular to this strain and reporter. Note that these units
each object as a 3D ellipsoid with a height derived from the mean of are equivalent to 1.86 × 10−6 cm/s, using the fact that NPCs are regu-
the minor and major radii (or just using the minor radii for the height larly spaced throughout the NE at a conveniently constant density of
approximation of the cell body, because they tend to sit flat on the slide, 11.2 NPCs/µm2 surface area throughout the cell cycle (Winey et al.,
like a rugby ball). NPC count of each cell was estimated assuming 11.2 1997), consistently so among strains according to measurements of rim
NPCs/µm2 (Winey et al., 1997). More direct 3D rendering of the cells intensity of nups (Fig. S3). We favor the use of molecules per second
was not possible using this epifluorescence system, because deconvo- per NPC per micromole because these units are more intuitive in the
lution algorithms generate artifacts near the top and bottom of the yeast context of the current study. The flux J, in molecules per second per
cells, which tend to bend light like small lenses. In spite of the assump- NPC per micromole, can be also stated in terms of the net change in N
tions required in this approach, the morphological values obtained by over time t in seconds, the nuclear volume Vn in liters, and the Avoga-
this method were within 10% of those obtained by direct measurement dro constant Na, specified in µM−1:
of a complete 3D rendering using confocal microscopy.
Time course images were processed and segmented using an J =
_ d_N_
⋅
_N_a_ _⋅ _V_n_
. (2)
dt NPCs
automated but user-directed software. Images were corrected for flat-
field illumination, and then a four-dimensional watershed split was per- By rearranging Eqs. 1 and 2, we get:
formed to excise the data of the targeted cell. Time course images were
_d_N_ _N_P_C__s_ ⋅_ p_
segmented into nuclear and cytoplasmic regions using an algorithm = ⋅ (C − N) .
dt Na ⋅ Vn
70 JCB • Volume 215 • NumBer 1 • 2016
Downloaded
from
http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/215/1/57/1596505/jcb_201601004.pdf
by
guest
on
05
December
2025
The cytoplasmic concentration C can be eliminated entirely if we as- Sedimentation constant measurement by sucrose
sume that each cell has a constant amount of GFP substrate, T, and use gradient ultracentrifugation
the cytoplasmic volume Vc. WT yeast, expressing each of the GFP-xPrA substrates were harvested
then lysed by cryogenic grinding. Cell lysates were clarified by low-
_ d
d
_N
t
_
=
_N
N
_P_
a
C_
⋅
_s
V
_ ⋅_
n
p_
⋅ (
_ T_ –_ _
V
N_
c
_⋅ _ V_n_
−N ) . and then medium-speed centrifugation, first at 14,000 rpm in a bench-
top mini-centrifuge for 15 min and then at 55,000 rpm in a benchtop
After some simple rearrangements: ultracentrifuge in a TLA55 rotor (Beckman Coulter) for 30 min. Ly-
sates for all substrates were combined, and then 100 µl combined ly-
_d_N_ _N_P_C__s_ ⋅_ p_ _ [T_ _–_ N__ ⋅ _ (_V_c_ +__ V_n_)_ ]
= ⋅ . sate was overlaid on 5–15 or 5–20% sucrose gradients. Overlaid on
dt Na ⋅ Vn Vc
the same gradients was a commercial mixture of low molecular mass
This solution for the resulting simple ordinary differential equation globular protein standards, containing 100–200 µg each protein stan-
(ODE) for N over time (t) is: dards, RNase, albumin, ovalbumin, and chymotrypsinogen A. Sucrose
gradients were centrifuged for 19–24 h in an SW55 rotor (Beckman
N = _ V _ c _ + T_ V _ n _ + α e −_ N_P__C_ N s_⋅ a _p_ ⋅ ⋅ V _t _⋅ c ( _ ⋅ V_ V c_ n _+ _V_n__) . Coulter) at 55,000 rpm. Gradients were unloaded into 1.5-mm fractions
using a piston gradient fractionator. All methods were performed at 4°C
Time course traces of nuclear GFP fluorescence (Nf) were therefore in solutions buffered with transport buffer with Tween (20 mM Hepes,
fitted to a single exponential, pH 7.4, 110 mM KOAc, 0.1% Tween-20, and 2 mM MgCl) spiked
2
with a 1:200 mixture of both a commercial protease inhibitor cocktail
Nf = a + c e −b t . (Sigma-Aldrich) and Solution P (0.5 mg/ml Pepstatin A and 20 mg/ml
PMSF, in ethanol). Morris buffer concentrate (6×) was added to the gra-
The time constant of exponential decay τ is the inverse of b, whereas p dient fractions for separation by SDS-PAGE. One set of gels was West-
can be derived from τ, which we measure directly, provided morpho- ern blotted and then probed with anti-GFP (Roche), whereas another
logical measurements of the cell, thus: set of gels was stained with Coomassie to detect the protein standards.
Relative quantities and migration profiles of the GFP-xPrA substrates
p = ____N__a_ ⋅ _ V_ c_ _⋅ _V_n_ ___ . and the globular standard proteins were measured from images of the
τ ⋅ NPCs ⋅ ( Vc + Vn)
Western blots or Coomassie-stained gels, respectively. Sedimentation
We note that p is independent of the morphological measure- coefficients were calculated from the peak migration distance of each
ments of the cell, which were only used to compute it from the raw protein using standard calculations (Griffith, 1983). Stated sedimen-
measurements of τ. Thus, p is derived as the permeability of a partic- tation values are a mean of three to six such experiments. S values
ular strain’s NPCs toward a particular GFP-xPrA variant, in units of of GFP-xPrA are compared with those of the globular commercial
net molecules diffusing through a single NPC per second per 1 μM standards in Fig. S1 A.
concentration differential across the NPC. For each strain–substrate
condition, 14–58 single-cell measurements were made, and the mean Diffusion constant measurement by DLS
value stated ± SEM. All image processing and analyses were handled Recombinant GFP-xPrA fusion proteins were expressed as HIS-tagged
by MatLab scripts, coordinated by custom graphical user interfaces, versions from pET28 plasmids in BL21-DE3 Escherichia coli. Cells
which facilitated the evaluation and refinement of multidimensional were lysed using a microfluidizer, clarified by centrifugation, and the
image segmentation, side-by-side with the resultant fluorescence traces fusion proteins were purified from the lysate via their 6xHIS tags with
and derived measurements. TAL ON resin using standard protein purification methods. Purifica-
Similar measurements of the dynamics of Kap123-GFP were tions were performed in PBS in the presence of 0.1 mM EDTA and
taken using this FRAP method. These measurements also fit well to a protease inhibitor cocktail. Diffusion constants of 1-mg/ml samples
the basic form of the same single exponential relationship, as expected of the recombinantly purified fusion proteins were measured using a
(Kopito and Elbaum, 2007; Kim and Elbaum, 2013b). However, in this DLS instrument (Wyatt Technology) using the manufacturer’s Dynam-
case, the value of the exponential time constant τ includes the trans- ics software. Reported values are the averages of 5–10 measurements.
port of Kap123 alone and in an unknown quantity of cargo and/or
NTR complexes, each for which the time constant may be dominated SAXS
by docking probabilities to the NPC rather than transport efficiency SAXS profiles of five constructs of GFP-PrAs and two constructs of
(Kim and Elbaum, 2013b). GFP-PrGs (Fig. 3 D and Table S4) were collected at concentrations
ranging from 0.5 to 2.0 mg/ml at temperatures of 15°C (beamline 4–2
Estimation of transport time constant for proteins in the Popken et al. of the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource, SLAC National
dataset Accelerator Laboratory). All purified, His-tagged SAXS samples were
Popken et al. (2015) reported the ratio of nuclear to cytoplasmic fluo- prepared as for the DLS experiments and directly dialyzed overnight at
rescence of inert reporter macromolecules after 3 h of expression and 4°C against 20 mM Hepes, 300 mM NaCl, and 5% glycerol buffer. The
1 h of equilibration. By assuming exponential decay of the normal- 5% glycerol protects proteins from radiation damage during x-ray ex-
ized cytoplasmic pool (as observed in all of our FRAP experiments) posure (Kuwamoto et al., 2004). Up to 20 1-s exposures at SSRL beam-
and that their yeast cells had similar mean NPC counts, cytoplasmic line 4–2 were used for each sample. The SAXS profile of each buffer
volumes, and nuclear volumes to our own, we estimated the transport was obtained in the same manner and subtracted from a protein SAXS
time constant (the exponential decay coefficient) ^ τ that would lead to profile. The buffer subtracted SAXS profiles were initially analyzed
the same nuclear to cytoplasmic fluorescence ratio within an hour. We using the ATSA S package (Petoukhov et al., 2012) to calculate radius
were able to apply this analysis only to the bulkier macromolecules in of gyration (R) and maximum particle size (D ; Table S4). The mean
g max
the size range 109–230 kD, which transport slowly enough to prevent of the smaller scattering angle regions (q < 0.15 Å-1) of the lower con-
full equilibration within this time scale. centration profiles (∼0.5 mg/ml) and the mean of the wider scattering
Simple rules for passive diffusion through the NPC • Timney et al. 71
Downloaded
from
http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/215/1/57/1596505/jcb_201601004.pdf
by
guest
on
05
December
2025
angle regions (q > 0.12 Å-1) of the higher concentration (∼2.0 mg/ml) Brownian dynamics simulations
profiles were merged to obtain the final experimental SAXS profiles. We modeled the transport system using our open-source Integrative
Modeling Platform package (http: //integrativemodeling .org; Russel
Shape modeling based on SAXS and ultracentrifugation data et al., 2012). The simulation model consists of the NE, the NPC, and
The ab initio shape of each of the substrates in our dataset of GFP-PrA the diffusing substrates, all enclosed within a bounding box of 100 ×
macromolecules (Fig. 3 D, substrates ≤68 kD) were generated from 100 × 100 nm (Fig. 4 A). The NPC central channel was modeled as
their corresponding SAXS profiles by running DAMM IF (Franke and a 15-nm–high cylinder with the inner diameter of 27 nm, forming a
Svergun, 2009) 20 times and then refined through an additional 40 cavity within the NE (control simulations on a slightly larger NPC that
DAM MIN (Svergun, 1999) runs followed by superposition and aver- better reflects the known NPC geometry are described at the end of this
aging with DAMA VER (Volkov and Svergun, 2003). Because S /S section). 32 chains of FG repeats were anchored to the NPC scaffold in
max
were highly correlated with the shape asymmetry measured by SAXS 4 layers of 8 chains each. Each chain was modeled as a flexible string
(Fig. 3 C, top) and consistent with diffusion coefficient measurements of 45 beads of radius 0.6 nm each (Fig. 4 A, inset). Consecutive beads
by DLS (Fig. 3 D, bottom), we modeled the shapes for the larger sub- were connected an equilibrium length of 1.8 nm between consecutive
strates in the Popken et al. (2015) dataset based on their S /S ratios bead centers and using a linear potential, approximating the springlike
max
(Fig. 3 D). For illustration purposes, the crystallographic models of nature of flexible polymers in general (van der and Maarel, 2008) and
GFP (accession no. 1EMA), PrA (accession no. 1ZXG), PrA (acces- FG repeat domains in particular (Denning et al., 2003; Lim et al., 2006;
sion no. 1GB1), and maltose binding protein (accession no. 1ANF) Hough et al., 2015; Milles et al., 2015; Lemke, 2016; Raveh et al., 2016;
subunits were fitted to the enclosing envelopes. Sakiyama et al., 2016), but using a constant force of 1.0 kcal/M/A as a
first approximation. Substrate molecules were modeled as rigid spheres
Comparison of aqueous channel model to experimental of molecular masses from 28 to 223 (radii of 2.0 to 4.0 nm, assuming
measurements constant protein density of 1.38 g/cm2; Fig. 4 A, inset). 100 substrate
The empirically tested theory of diffusion through porous aqueous molecules were included, resulting in the substrate concentration of
membranes predicts that the permeability coefficient p of porous mem- ∼0.2 mM. Excluded volume interactions were approximated using
branes depends on the particle probability to enter the pore (Eq. 3) mul- a constant repulsive force of 20.0 kcal/M/A, which was exerted on
tiplied by the particle friction with the pore walls (Eq. 4; Renkin, 1954): overlapping spheres or on spheres that penetrated either the NE or the
bounding box. To approximate the differences in the diffusion rates
_r_ 2
F 1 = ( 1 − r 0 ) , (3) of molecules of different sizes, we assume for simplicity that the
Stokes radius of each sphere equals its actual radius R in angstroms
and assign each sphere a translational diffusion coefficient using the
_r_ _r_ 3 _r_ 5
F 2 = 1 − 2.1 r 0 + 2.1 ( r 0 ) − 0.95 ( r 0 ) , (4) Stokes-Einstein equation:
__kT__
and p = F · F, where r is the particle radius and r is the pore radius. D =
1 2 0 6πηR
We show that this model of a narrow aqueous channel results in a rigid
rather than soft barrier to passive transport that is incompatible with in A2/fs units, where η = 0.92 is the dynamic viscosity of water at 297.15
the data (Fig. 3 F; using the approximation r ∼ M M 1/3 for globular K in mPa*s units and kT is given in femtojoules. Brownian dynamics
proteins [Erickson, 2009]). More formally, when r << r, then F ≈ 1 simulations were implemented in Integrative Modeling Platform (Rus-
0 1
and so F dominates p, and in this case, it is easy to show by taking sel et al., 2012) in standard form (Ermak and McCammon, 1978) at
2
the first derivative of F that p decreases extremely slowly with respect 297.15 K. The force vector ⇀ f (t) acting on the i’th particle at time step
2 i
to either radius or molecular mass. In particular, in this radius range, t is computed from the gradient of the energy function. The particle
it decreases more slowly than the cubic relation observed experimen- coordinates X are then updated using the discrete integration equation: i
t w al h l i y c h (F s i h g a . r 3 p l F y ) . d C ro o p n s v t e o r s z e e ly r , o a a s t r t / h r a 0 t r e li a m ch it e , s a 1 s .0 ca , n p b is e d s o h m ow in n a t b e y d t b a y k i F n 1 g , X (t + 1) = X (t) + _Δ_t_ D f ⇀ ( t) + R ( √ _ D _ Δ __ t ) ,
i i kT i
the derivative of F. Specifically, it cannot be approximated by an in-
1 ____
verse-cubic relation between p and the molecular mass, except over an where R ( √ DΔt ) is a normally distributed random variable with zero
extremely narrow range of radii or molecular masses: the derivative of mean and variance DΔt . Hydrodynamic interactions were neglected.
an inverse-cubic function takes the value −3 on a log-log scale, so we The dynamics of the entire system were simulated for 20.0 µs
can take the derivative of ln(F) with respect to ln(MW) and compare to with a time step of 470 fs. The first 10.0 µs of each simulation were
1
−3, again assuming r ∼ M M 1/3 : considered as equilibration time and discarded from the subsequent
statistical analysis. The entire process was repeated 20,000 times
_ d d_ L L_ n n_ (M (_ F_ M 1 _ )_ ) = _ − 3 _ 2_ _ r 0 _ r − _ r = _ − 3 _ 2_ _ M _ M __ 0 1 M / _ 3 − M_ _ M 1/_3 M __ 1/ _ 3 . (5) i e n a d c e h p s e u n b d s e t n ra tl t y e . t B y y p e c , o w lle e c t o i b n t g a i s n t e a d ti s d ti a c t s a f f r r o o m m e 1 a 0 ch .0 o s f o th f e s 1 im 00 u l c a o ti p o i n e s p o er f
Eq. 5 takes the value −3 ± 0.5 (approximately cubic) only when r/r
0
particle type using a total computation time of ∼9,000 central processing
is between 79 and 84%, or stated in terms of molecular masses, when unit days on our local Linux computer cluster. The simulations with
MM/MM is between 49 and 59% of MM, the molecular mass of a modified FG repeat densities were conducted as described in the first
0 0
spherical molecule of radius r. Hence, a simple aqueous pore model paragraph of this section, but the number of chains of FG repeats was
0
cannot be used to approximate the cubic relation that we observed over decreased to either 28, 24, 20, or 16 chains, arranged in four layers as
the wide range 27 to 230 kD, or for that matter, with any other soft grad- before. Control simulations were also performed on a larger system that
ually decaying (long-tailed) size-dependent barrier (compare Fig. 1 A more closely approximates the known dimensions of the yeast NPC
and Fig. 3 F). We conclude that passive transport cannot correspond to and the NE (Yang et al., 1998; Alber et al., 2007a; inner diameter of
a translocation through a simple aqueous channel that obeys the clas- 38 nm and NE width of 30 nm), with seven layers of eight chains of
sic models of porous membranes and that a more elaborate model is FG repeats each to maintain the same grafting density. These control
needed to explain the observed transport rates. simulations produced the same overall trends as those of the smaller
72 JCB • Volume 215 • NumBer 1 • 2016
Downloaded
from
http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/215/1/57/1596505/jcb_201601004.pdf
by
guest
on
05 December
2025
systems (Fig. S2 D). Another control simulation used an eightfold ical user interfaces created in MatLab for this expressed purpose. Each
larger box size (8.7-fold larger cytoplasmic and nuclear volumes) to image was corrected for flat field illumination, background subtracted,
verify that we model the effect of changes in these volumes correctly, and then all images in the z axis were collapsed by maximum pro-
resulting in a ninefold decrease in simulated transport rates. The smaller jection down to a single image for each field of cells. Using image
systems were used for the rest of the analysis to obtain better-converged segmentation scripts, cell bodies were detected and then segmented
statistics. Control simulations of cohesive FG domains were conducted into nuclear, cytoplasmic, and nuclear rim regions. These segmentation
by introducing a binding site on a random surface point on each of algorithms followed the basic algorithmic structure of edge detection,
the FG beads with an attractive range of 6 Å and an attractive force then edge completion, followed by automatic extraneous object exclu-
constant of 2.5 kcal/M/Å (potential binding energy of 15 kcal/M per sion. Nuclear fluorescence measurements were derived simply as mean
site), acting between pairs of FG beads. Each bead was also assigned nuclear pixel intensity, whereas cytoplasmic fluorescence was obtained
a random rotational diffusion coefficient using the Einstein-Stokes from a k-means analysis of the extranuclear pixels (this analysis was
equation. Torques between binding sites were integrated similarly to calibrated to exclude dark vacuolar regions and the bleed-through light
the integration of translational forces described earlier in this section at perinuclear regions). Where possible, the scripts calculated nuclear
for X(t + 1). The configuration files for all simulations are available at rim fluorescence by tracing the brightest pixels around the periphery of
i
https ://zenodo .org /record /154746# .V -WW -pMrJE6. the nuclear regions and then averaged this summed pixel intensity over
perimeter distance. This analysis was performed to derive N/C fluores-
Glossary cence ratios and nuclear rim intensity measurements for 98–1,401 indi-
τ is the exponential time constant in seconds for the measured decay vidual cells from each of the 27 strain-reporter combinations; a total of
in nuclear fluorescence after photobleaching in individual cells. At the 9,621 cells were thus measured using these methods.
single-molecule level, τ is the mean timespan between two consecutive
translocations through the NE. τ is a function of p, the cytoplasmic Statistical regression analysis
volume Vc, the nuclear volume Vn, and the number of NPCs in the cell: Statistical regression analysis using LAS SO was done using the MatLab
implementation of LAS SO. LAS SO is particularly suitable for finding
τ = _ ___N__a_ ⋅ _ V_ c_ _⋅ V__n_ ___ , statistical correlations in small datasets, because it deploys a regular-
p ⋅ NPCs ⋅ ( Vc + Vn)
ization scheme that effectively penalizes solutions with a larger number
where Na is Avogadro’s number in µmol−1 (Materials and methods). ^ τ of variables, thereby reducing the risk of overfitting (Tibshirani, 1996).
is the hypothetical value of τ in a typical yeast cell with mean values Preprocessing. For each of 13 strains (WT plus 12 mutant strains
of cytoplasmic volume, nuclear volume, and NE surface area. p is the with FG repeat deletions), 33 features (Fig. S5 and Tables S3 and
permeability coefficient of the NE in molecules per second per NPC per S4) that quantitatively describe the NPC composition, geometry, and
micromole (flux per concentration difference), or equivalently, 1.86 × biophysical properties of that strain were gathered. A 13 × 33 matrix
10−6 cm/s, assuming a density of 11.2 NPCs/µm2; p is inversely propor- M was constructed, with M being the value of the j’th feature in the
ij
tional to ^τ . ΔG
passive
is the free energy penalty for the translocation of an i’th strain. The regression analysis aimed to create a predictor from
inert macromolecule from the cytoplasm or the nucleus into the NPC. the rows of M (the vectors of features for each strain). The columns
of M (the vectors of each feature) were centered by subtractions of
Computation of free energy landscape from the simulations their mean and normalized by division with their standard errors. In
The positional distribution of the simulated particles was computed addition, a 13-dimensional response vector Y was constructed with the
over a 100 × 100 × 100 grid with voxel size of 1 × 1 × 1 nm in time WT relative permeability of each strain, formally defined as the ratio
intervals of 10 ns over all simulations. The 2D energy landscape between the permeability of each strain and the WT permeability, av-
(Fig. 5 E) spanned by the z axis (projected position along the NPC eraged across all cargo types for which a measurement was taken in
central axis) and the x axis (arbitrary direction on the orthogonal plane that strain. The regression analysis aimed to create a predictor from
parallel with the NE) was computed by averaging over all planes that the rows of M (the feature vector of each strain) to Y. Conversely, each
lie on the central axis of the NPC and transformed to an energy land- feature was represented as a 13-dimensional feature vector f, in which
scape with units of kT based on the Boltzmann distribution by taking each vector coordinate f represents the value of that feature in strain
j
the log of these densities. Similarly, the energy landscape across the j. The coordinates of f and s were normalized by subtracting the feature
NPC (Fig. 5 F) was computed by obtaining the marginal distribution mean and dividing by the feature SD across all mutant strains.
along the z axis (integrating over the x and y coordinates; Fig. 5 F). To remove strong statistical redundancies that obscure the re-
gression analysis, we first clustered the 33 feature vectors using their
Transport factor and nup distribution analysis mutual Pearson’s correlation values and randomly selected representa-
The steady-state distributions of genomically tagged Kap95-mCherry, tive features from cliques of features in which all pairs of features had
Kap123-GFP, Ntf2-GFP, Crm1-GFP, Nup116-GFP, Nup170-GFP, and Pearson’s correlation >0.9. We then applied PCA to further eliminate
Ndc1-GFP were observed in each of the representative yeast strains, redundant degrees of freedom while maximizing the information con-
nup116ΔFG, nsp1ΔFG, NΔFG CΔFG nsp1ΔFG, and WT. All images for each tent in each selected degree of freedom (Jolliffe, 1982). We applied the
fluorescently tagged protein were acquired on the same day for each PCA/LAS SO method iteratively, removing features that were selected
strain to avoid daily fluctuations in fluorescence measurements. For with extremely low weights until the process converged on a final list of
each combination of fusion protein and strain, images of fields of live eight features from two highly correlated subgroups that are predicted
cells were acquired at 100× magnification on an Axiovert 200 micro- to have the greatest effect on passive transport rates (features related
scope (ZEI SS) fitted with an UltraView spinning disk confocal imaging to charge to hydrophobicity and features related to proximity to the
head (PerkinElmer), using an iXon EMCC D camera (Andor Technol- cytoplasmic end of the pore).
ogy), controlled by MetaMorph imaging software. A series of images
through the complete z axis of each field was acquired. Online supplemental material
Semiautomated image analysis was performed using a series of Fig. S1 shows supporting analyses of shape effects in relation to
image segmentation, measurement and data-review scripts, and graph- Fig. 3. Fig. S2 shows the thermodynamics and kinetics of simulated
Simple rules for passive diffusion through the NPC • Timney et al. 73
Downloaded
from
http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/215/1/57/1596505/jcb_201601004.pdf
by
guest
on
05
December
2025
passive diffusion in relation to Fig. 4. Fig. S3 shows the general effect Christie, M., C.W. Chang, G. Rona, K.M. Smith, A.G. Stewart, A.A. Takeda,
M.R. Fontes, M. Stewart, B.G. Vertessy, J.K. Forwood, and B. Kobe.
on the transport machinery in FG deletion strains, providing controls
2016. Structural biology and regulation of protein import into the
for our measurements of passive diffusion. Fig. S4 shows Kap123 dy- nucleus. J. Mol. Biol. 428:2060–2090. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jmb
namics, which seem independent of passive NPC permeability, but are .2015 .10 .023
greatly reduced upon deletion of particular FG regions. Fig. S5 shows Colwell, L.J., M.P. Brenner, and K. Ribbeck. 2010. Charge as a selection criterion
for translocation through the nuclear pore complex. PLOS Comput. Biol.
relative transport times plotted as a function of individual features of
6:e1000747. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1371 /journal .pcbi .1000747
the mutant strains and the corresponding R2 correlation coefficients.
Denning, D.P., S.S. Patel, V. Uversky, A.L. Fink, and M. Rexach. 2003. Disorder
Fig. S6 shows an assessment of the robustness of positive and negative in the nuclear pore complex: the FG repeat regions of nucleoporins are
contribution of various FG Nup features in the combined PCA/LAS natively unfolded. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 100:2450–2455. http ://dx
.doi .org /10 .1073 /pnas .0437902100
SO regression model of passive transport in different settings. Fig. S7
Dunker, A.K., I. Silman, V.N. Uversky, and J.L. Sussman. 2008. Function and
shows a sequence and spatial analysis of the different FG Nups and structure of inherently disordered proteins. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.
mutant strains. Fig. S8 shows the change in the ratio between nuclear 18:756–764. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /j .sbi .2008 .10 .002
and cytoplasmic fluorescence at equilibrium relative to the WT strain Eibauer, M., M. Pellanda, Y. Turgay, A. Dubrovsky, A. Wild, and O. Medalia.
2015. Structure and gating of the nuclear pore complex. Nat. Commun.
for the different GFP-xPrA substrates in the nup116ΔFG strain. Video 1
6:7532. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1038 /ncomms8532
shows FRAP permeability assays of four representative WT cells,
Erickson, H.P. 2009. Size and shape of protein molecules at the nanometer level
each expressing a different-sized GFP-xPrA substrate. Video 2 shows determined by sedimentation, gel filtration, and electron microscopy.
sample simulation trajectory of passive diffusion of macromolecules Biol. Proced. Online. 11:32–51. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1007 /s12575 -009
-9008 -x
of different molecular masses/radii through the NPC, using the model
Ermak, D.L., and J.A. McCammon. 1978. Brownian dynamics with
described in the text and in Fig. 4 and Fig. S2. Table S1 shows the hydrodynamic interactions. J. Chem. Phys. 69:1352–1360. http ://dx .doi
plasmids used in this study. Table S2 shows the strains used in this .org /10 .1063 /1 .436761
study. Table S3 shows the features used to describe the NPCs of mutant Eyring, H. 1935. The activated complex in chemical reactions. J. Chem. Phys.
3:107–115. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1063 /1 .1749604
strains and for the regression analysis. Table S4 shows the SAXS mea-
Fischer, H., I. Polikarpov, and A.F. Craievich. 2004. Average protein density is a
surements of maximal end-to-end distances and radii of gyration for
molecular-weight-dependent function. Protein Sci. 13:2825–2828. http ://
GFP-xPrA and GFP-xPrG molecules. dx .doi .org /10 .1110 /ps .04688204
Franke, D., and D.I. Svergun. 2009. DAMM IF, a program for rapid ab-initio
Acknowledgments shape determination in small-angle scattering. J. Appl. Cryst. 42:342–
346. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1107 /S0021889809000338
Frey, S., and D. Görlich. 2007. A saturated FG-repeat hydrogel can reproduce the
We thank Liesbeth Veenhoff and Patrick Onck for helpful discussion, permeability properties of nuclear pore complexes. Cell. 130:512–523.
sharing of unpublished data, and critical reading of the manuscript; http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /j .cell .2007 .06 .024
and Laura Terry, who assisted in the assembly of strains for these studies. Gavin, A.C., M. Bösche, R. Krause, P. Grandi, M. Marzioch, A. Bauer,
J. Schultz, J.M. Rick, A.M. Michon, C.M. Cruciat, et al. 2002. Functional
organization of the yeast proteome by systematic analysis of protein
This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants P41 complexes. Nature. 415:141–147. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1038 /415141a
GM109824 (to M.P. Rout and A. Sali), R01 GM112108 (to M.P. Rout Ghavami, A., L.M. Veenhoff, E. van der Giessen, and P.R. Onck. 2014. Probing
and A. Sali), U01 GM098256 (to M.P. Rout and A. Sali), and R01 the disordered domain of the nuclear pore complex through coarse-
grained molecular dynamics simulations. Biophys. J. 107:1393–1402.
GM071329 (to M.P. Rout).
http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /j .bpj .2014 .07 .060
Ghavami, A., E. van der Giessen, and P.R. Onck. 2016. Energetics of transport
The authors declare no competing financial interests. through the nuclear pore complex. PLoS One. 11:e0148876. http ://dx .doi
.org /10 .1371 /journal .pone .0148876
Submitted: 4 January 2016 Goryaynov, A., and W. Yang. 2014. Role of molecular charge in nucleocytoplasmic
transport. PLoS One. 9:e88792. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1371 /journal .pone
Accepted: 6 September 2016 .0088792
Goward, C.R., J.P. Murphy, T. Atkinson, and D.A. Barstow. 1990. Expression and
purification of a truncated recombinant streptococcal protein G. Biochem.
References
J. 267:171–177. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1042 /bj2670171
Adams, R.L., L.J. Terry, and S.R. Wente. 2015. A novel Saccharomyces Griffith, O.M. 1983. Techniques of preparative, zonal, and continuous flow ul-
cerevisiae FG nucleoporin mutant collection for use in nuclear pore tracentrifugation. Beckman Intruments Inc. Spinco Division, Palo Alto,
complex functional experiments. G3 (Bethesda). 6:51–58. http ://dx .doi CA. 50 pp.
.org /10 .1534 /g3 .115 .023002 Grünwald, D., and R.H. Singer. 2010. In vivo imaging of labelled endogenous
Alber, F., S. Dokudovskaya, L.M. Veenhoff, W. Zhang, J. Kipper, D. Devos, β-actin mRNA during nucleocytoplasmic transport. Nature. 467:604–
A. Suprapto, O. Karni-Schmidt, R. Williams, B.T. Chait, et al. 2007a. 607. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1038 /nature09438
Determining the architectures of macromolecular assemblies. Nature. Hough, L.E., K. Dutta, S. Sparks, D.B. Temel, A. Kamal, J. Tetenbaum-Novatt,
450:683–694. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1038/ nature06404 M.P. Rout, and D. Cowburn. 2015. The molecular mechanism of nuclear
Alber, F., S. Dokudovskaya, L.M. Veenhoff, W. Zhang, J. Kipper, D. Devos, transport revealed by atomic-scale measurements. eLife. 4:4. http ://dx .doi
A. Suprapto, O. Karni-Schmidt, R. Williams, B.T. Chait, et al. 2007b. The .org /10 .7554 /eLife .10027
molecular architecture of the nuclear pore complex. Nature. 450:695– Hülsmann, B.B., A.A. Labokha, and D. Görlich. 2012. The permeability of
701. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1038 /nature06405 reconstituted nuclear pores provides direct evidence for the selective
Atkinson, C.E., A.L. Mattheyses, M. Kampmann, and S.M. Simon. 2013. phase model. Cell. 150:738–751. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /j .cell .2012
Conserved spatial organization of FG domains in the nuclear pore .07 .019
complex. Biophys. J. 104:37–50. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /j .bpj .2012 .11 Iovine, M.K., and S.R. Wente. 1997. A nuclear export signal in Kap95p is
.3823 required for both recycling the import factor and interaction with the
Bayliss, R., K. Ribbeck, D. Akin, H.M. Kent, C.M. Feldherr, D. Görlich, and nucleoporin GLFG repeat regions of Nup116p and Nup100p. J. Cell Biol.
M. Stewart. 1999. Interaction between NTF2 and xFxFG-containing 137:797–811. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1083 /jcb .137 .4 .797
nucleoporins is required to mediate nuclear import of RanGDP. J. Mol. Jolliffe, I.T. 1982. A note on the use of principal components in regression. Appl.
Biol. 293:579–593. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1006 /jmbi .1999 .3166 Stat. 31:300–303. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .2307 /2348005
Bayliss, R., S.W. Leung, R.P. Baker, B.B. Quimby, A.H. Corbett, and M. Stewart. Jovanovic-Talisman, T., J. Tetenbaum-Novatt, A.S. McKenney, A. Zilman,
2002. Structural basis for the interaction between NTF2 and nucleoporin R. Peters, M.P. Rout, and B.T. Chait. 2009. Artificial nanopores that
FxFG repeats. EMBO J. 21:2843–2853. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1093 /emboj mimic the transport selectivity of the nuclear pore complex. Nature.
/cdf305 457:1023–1027. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1038 /nature07600
74 JCB • Volume 215 • NumBer 1 • 2016
Downloaded
from
http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/215/1/57/1596505/jcb_201601004.pdf
by
guest
on
05
December
2025
Kapinos, L.E., R.L. Schoch, R.S. Wagner, K.D. Schleicher, and R.Y. Lim. Milles, S., D. Mercadante, I.V. Aramburu, M.R. Jensen, N. Banterle, C. Koehler,
2014. Karyopherin-centric control of nuclear pores based on molecular S. Tyagi, J. Clarke, S.L. Shammas, M. Blackledge, et al. 2015. Plasticity
occupancy and kinetic analysis of multivalent binding with FG of an ultrafast interaction between nucleoporins and nuclear transport
nucleoporins. Biophys. J. 106:1751–1762. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /j .bpj receptors. Cell. 163:734–745. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /j .cell .2015 .09
.2014 .02 .021 .047
Keilhauer, E.C., M.Y. Hein, and M. Mann. 2015. Accurate protein complex Mincer, J.S., and S.M. Simon. 2011. Simulations of nuclear pore transport yield
retrieval by affinity enrichment mass spectrometry (AE-MS) rather than mechanistic insights and quantitative predictions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
affinity purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS). Mol. Cell. Proteomics. USA. 108:E351–E358. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1073 /pnas .1104521108
14:120–135. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1074 /mcp .M114 .041012
Mohr, D., S. Frey, T. Fischer, T. Güttler, and D. Görlich. 2009. Characterisation
Keminer, O., and R. Peters. 1999. Permeability of single nuclear pores. Biophys. of the passive permeability barrier of nuclear pore complexes. EMBO
J. 77:217–228. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /S0006 -3495(99)76883 -9 J. 28:2541–2553. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1038 /emboj .2009 .200
Kim, S., and M. Elbaum. 2013a. Enzymatically driven transport: a kinetic theory Moussavi-Baygi, R., Y. Jamali, R. Karimi, and M.R. Mofrad. 2011. Brownian
for nuclear export. Biophys. J. 105:1997–2005. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 dynamics simulation of nucleocytoplasmic transport: a coarse-grained
/j .bpj .2013 .09 .011 model for the functional state of the nuclear pore complex. PLOS Comput.
Kim, S., and M. Elbaum. 2013b. A simple kinetic model with explicit predictions Biol. 7:e1002049. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1371 /journal .pcbi .1002049
for nuclear transport. Biophys. J. 105:565–569. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 Musser, S.M., and D. Grünwald. 2016. Deciphering the structure and function
/j .bpj .2013 .04 .025 of nuclear pores using single-molecule fluorescence approaches. J. Mol.
Kirli, K., S. Karaca, H.J. Dehne, M. Samwer, K.T. Pan, C. Lenz, H. Urlaub, Biol. 428:2091–2119. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jmb .2016 .02 .023
and D. Görlich. 2015. A deep proteomics perspective on CRM1-mediated Naim, B., D. Zbaida, S. Dagan, R. Kapon, and Z. Reich. 2009. Cargo surface
nuclear export and nucleocytoplasmic partitioning. eLife. 4:4. http ://dx hydrophobicity is sufficient to overcome the nuclear pore complex
.doi .org /10 .7554 /eLife .11466 selectivity barrier. EMBO J. 28:2697–2705. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1038 /
Kiskin, N.I., J.P. Siebrasse, and R. Peters. 2003. Optical microwell assay of emboj .2009 .225
membrane transport kinetics. Biophys. J. 85:2311–2322. http ://dx .doi .org Paine, P.L., and C.M. Feldherr. 1972. Nucleocytoplasmic exchange of
/10 .1016 /S0006 -3495(03)74655 -4 macromolecules. Exp. Cell Res. 74:81–98. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016
Knockenhauer, K.E., and T.U. Schwartz. 2016. The nuclear pore complex as /0014 -4827(72)90483 -1
a flexible and dynamic gate. Cell. 164:1162–1171. http ://dx .doi .org /10 Paine, P.L., L.C. Moore, and S.B. Horowitz. 1975. Nuclear envelope permeability.
.1016 /j .cell .2016 .01 .034 Nature. 254:109–114. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1038 /254109a0
Kopito, R.B., and M. Elbaum. 2007. Reversibility in nucleocytoplasmic Patel, S.S., B.J. Belmont, J.M. Sante, and M.F. Rexach. 2007. Natively unfolded
transport. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 104:12743–12748. http ://dx .doi nucleoporins gate protein diffusion across the nuclear pore complex. Cell.
.org /10 .1073 /pnas .0702690104 129:83–96. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /j .cell .2007 .01 .044
Kosinski, J., S. Mosalaganti, A. von Appen, R. Teimer, A.L. DiGuilio, W. Wan, Peleg, O., M. Tagliazucchi, M. Kröger, Y. Rabin, and I. Szleifer. 2011.
K.H. Bui, W.J. Hagen, J.A. Briggs, J.S. Glavy, et al. 2016. Molecular Morphology control of hairy nanopores. ACS Nano. 5:4737–4747. http ://
architecture of the inner ring scaffold of the human nuclear pore complex. dx .doi .org /10 .1021 /nn200702u
Science. 352:363–365. http ://dx .doi .org/ 10 .1126 /science .aaf0643
Peters, R. 2005. Translocation through the nuclear pore complex: selectivity and
Kuwamoto, S., S. Akiyama, and T. Fujisawa. 2004. Radiation damage to a protein speed by reduction-of-dimensionality. Traffic. 6:421–427. http ://dx .doi
solution, detected by synchrotron X-ray small-angle scattering: dose- .org /10 .1111 /j .1600 -0854 .2005 .00287 .x
related considerations and suppression by cryoprotectants. J. Synchrotron
Radiat. 11:462–468. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1107 /S0909049504019272 Petoukhov, M.V., D. Franke, A.V. Shkumatov, G. Tria, A.G. Kikhney, M. Gajda,
C. Gorba, H.D.T. Mertens, P.V. Konarev, and D.I. Svergun. 2012. New
Lemke, E.A. 2016. The multiple faces of disordered nucleoporins. J. Mol. Biol. developments in the ATS AS program package for small-angle scattering
428:2011–2024. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jmb .2016 .01 .002 data analysis. J. Appl. Cryst. 45:342–350. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1107 /
Lim, R.Y., N.P. Huang, J. Köser, J. Deng, K.H. Lau, K. Schwarz-Herion, S0021889812007662
B. Fahrenkrog, and U. Aebi. 2006. Flexible phenylalanine-glycine Popken, P., A. Ghavami, P.R. Onck, B. Poolman, and L.M. Veenhoff. 2015.
nucleoporins as entropic barriers to nucleocytoplasmic transport. Proc. Size-dependent leak of soluble and membrane proteins through the yeast
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 103:9512–9517. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1073 /pnas nuclear pore complex. Mol. Biol. Cell. 26:1386–1394. http ://dx .doi .org
.0603521103 /10 .1091 /mbc .E14 -07 -1175
Longtine, M.S., A. McKenzie III, D.J. Demarini, N.G. Shah, A. Wach,
Quimby, B.B., and M. Dasso. 2003. The small GTPase Ran: interpreting the
A. Brachat, P. Philippsen, and J.R. Pringle. 1998. Additional modules for signs. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 15:338–344. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /
versatile and economical PCR-based gene deletion and modification in S0955 -0674(03)00046 -2
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast. 14:953–961. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1002 /
(SICI)1097 -0061(199807)14 :10<953::AID-YEA293>3.0.CO;2-U Raveh, B., J.M. Karp, S. Sparks, K. Dutta, M.P. Rout, A. Sali, and D. Cowburn.
2016. Slide-and-exchange mechanism for rapid and selective transport Lord, C.L., B.L. Timney, M.P. Rout, and S.R. Wente. 2015. Altering nuclear
through the nuclear pore complex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA.
pore complex function impacts longevity and mitochondrial function in
113:E2489–E2497. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1073 /pnas .1522663113
S. cerevisiae. J. Cell Biol. 208:729–744. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1083 /jcb
.201412024 Reits, E.A., and J.J. Neefjes. 2001. From fixed to FRAP: measuring protein
mobility and activity in living cells. Nat. Cell Biol. 3:E145–E147. http ://
Lowe, A.R., J.J. Siegel, P. Kalab, M. Siu, K. Weis, and J.T. Liphardt. 2010. dx .doi .org /10 .1038 /35078615
Selectivity mechanism of the nuclear pore complex characterized by
single cargo tracking. Nature. 467:600–603. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1038 / Renkin, E.M. 1954. Filtration, diffusion, and molecular sieving through porous
nature09285 cellulose membranes. J. Gen. Physiol. 38:225–243.
Lowe, A.R., J.H. Tang, J. Yassif, M. Graf, W.Y. Huang, J.T. Groves, K. Weis, and Ribbeck, K., and D. Görlich. 2001. Kinetic analysis of translocation through
J.T. Liphardt. 2015. Importin-β modulates the permeability of the nuclear nuclear pore complexes. EMBO J. 20:1320–1330. http ://dx .doi .org /10
pore complex in a Ran-dependent manner. eLife. 4:e04052. http ://dx .doi .1093 /emboj /20 .6 .1320
.org /10 .7554 /eLife .04052 Ribbeck, K., and D. Görlich. 2002. The permeability barrier of nuclear pore
Ma, J., A. Goryaynov, A. Sarma, and W. Yang. 2012. Self-regulated viscous complexes appears to operate via hydrophobic exclusion. EMBO
channel in the nuclear pore complex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. J. 21:2664–2671. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1093 /emboj /21 .11 .2664
109:7326–7331. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1073 /pnas .1201724109 Rout, M.P., and S.R. Wente. 1994. Pores for thought: nuclear pore complex
Ma, J., A. Goryaynov, and W. Yang. 2016. Super-resolution 3D tomography of proteins. Trends Cell Biol. 4:357–365. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /0962
interactions and competition in the nuclear pore complex. Nat. Struct. -8924(94)90085 -X
Mol. Biol. 23:239–247. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1038 /nsmb .3174 Rout, M.P., J.D. Aitchison, A. Suprapto, K. Hjertaas, Y. Zhao, and B.T. Chait.
Marsh, J.A., and J.D. Forman-Kay. 2010. Sequence determinants of compaction 2000. The yeast nuclear pore complex: composition, architecture, and
in intrinsically disordered proteins. Biophys. J. 98:2383–2390. http ://dx transport mechanism. J. Cell Biol. 148:635–651. http ://dx .doi .org /10
.doi .org /10 .1016 /j .bpj .2010 .02 .006 .1083 /jcb .148 .4 .635
Mettenleiter, T.C. 2016. Breaching the barrier—The nuclear envelope in virus Rout, M.P., J.D. Aitchison, M.O. Magnasco, and B.T. Chait. 2003. Virtual gating
infection. J. Mol. Biol. 428:1949–1961. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /j .jmb and nuclear transport: the hole picture. Trends Cell Biol. 13:622–628. http
.2015 .10 .001 ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /j .tcb .2003 .10 .007
Mi, L., A. Goryaynov, A. Lindquist, M. Rexach, and W. Yang. 2015. Quantifying Russel, D., K. Lasker, B. Webb, J. Velázquez-Muriel, E. Tjioe, D. Schneidman-
nucleoporin stoichiometry inside single nuclear pore complexes in vivo. Duhovny, B. Peterson, and A. Sali. 2012. Putting the pieces together:
Sci. Rep. 5:9372. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1038 /srep09372 integrative modeling platform software for structure determination of
Simple rules for passive diffusion through the NPC • Timney et al. 75
Downloaded
from
http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/215/1/57/1596505/jcb_201601004.pdf
by
guest
on
05
December
2025
macromolecular assemblies. PLoS Biol. 10:e1001244. http ://dx .doi .org Tibshirani, R. 1996. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. J. R. Stat.
/10 .1371 /journal .pbio .1001244 Soc. Ser. B. 58:267–288.
Sakiyama, Y., A. Mazur, L.E. Kapinos, and R.Y. Lim. 2016. Spatiotemporal Timney, B.L., J. Tetenbaum-Novatt, D.S. Agate, R. Williams, W. Zhang,
dynamics of the nuclear pore complex transport barrier resolved by high- B.T. Chait, and M.P. Rout. 2006. Simple kinetic relationships and
speed atomic force microscopy. Nat. Nanotechnol. 11:719–723. http: //dx nonspecific competition govern nuclear import rates in vivo. J. Cell Biol.
.doi .org /10 .1038 /nnano .2016 .62 175:579–593. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1083 /jcb .200608141
Schellhaus, A.K., P. De Magistris, and W. Antonin. 2016. Nuclear reformation Tran, E.J., M.C. King, and A.H. Corbett. 2014. Macromolecular transport
at the end of mitosis. J. Mol. Biol. 428:1962–1985. http ://dx .doi .org /10 between the nucleus and the cytoplasm: Advances in mechanism and
.1016 /j .jmb .2015 .09 .016 emerging links to disease. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1843:2784–2795. http
Schmidt, H.B., and D. Görlich. 2015. Nup98 FG domains from diverse species ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /j .bbamcr .2014 .08 .003
spontaneously phase-separate into particles with nuclear pore-like Tu, L.C., G. Fu, A. Zilman, and S.M. Musser. 2013. Large cargo transport
permselectivity. eLife. 4:4. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .7554 /eLife .04251 by nuclear pores: implications for the spatial organization of FG-
Schmidt, H.B., and D. Görlich. 2016. Transport selectivity of nuclear pores, nucleoporins. EMBO J. 32:3220–3230. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1038 /emboj
phase separation, and membraneless organelles. Trends Biochem. Sci. .2013 .239
41:46–61. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /j .tibs .2015 .11 .001 van der Maarel, J.R.C. 2008. Introduction to Biopolymer Physics. World
Schmitz, K.S. 1990. An Introduction to Dynamic Light Scattering by Scientific, Singapore. 247 pp.
Macromolecules. Elsevier Science Publishing Co. Inc., New York. 470 Volkov, V.V., and D.I. Svergun. 2003. Uniqueness of ab initio shape determination
pp. in small-angle scattering. J. Appl. Cryst. 36:860–864. http ://dx .doi .org /10
.1107 /S0021889803000268
Sheff, M.A., and K.S. Thorn. 2004. Optimized cassettes for fluorescent protein
tagging in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast. 21:661–670. http ://dx .doi Vovk, A., C. Gu, M.G. Opferman, L.E. Kapinos, R.Y. Lim, R.D. Coalson,
.org /10 .1002 /yea .1130 D. Jasnow, and A. Zilman. 2016. Simple biophysics underpins collective
conformations of the intrinsically disordered proteins of the Nuclear Pore
Shulga, N., N. Mosammaparast, R. Wozniak, and D.S. Goldfarb. 2000. Yeast
Complex. eLife. 5:e10785. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .7554 /eLife .10785
nucleoporins involved in passive nuclear envelope permeability. J. Cell
Biol. 149:1027–1038. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1083 /jcb .149 .5 .1027 Wang, R., and M.G. Brattain. 2007. The maximal size of protein to diffuse
through the nuclear pore is larger than 60kDa. FEBS Lett. 581:3164–
Simon, D.N., and M.P. Rout. 2014. Cancer and the nuclear pore complex. Adv.
3170. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /j .febslet .2007 .05 .082 Exp. Med. Biol. 773:285–307. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1007 /978 -1 -4899
-8032 -8 _13 Winey, M., D. Yarar, T.H. Giddings Jr., and D.N. Mastronarde. 1997. Nuclear
pore complex number and distribution throughout the Saccharomyces
Smith, A., A. Brownawell, and I.G. Macara. 1998. Nuclear import of Ran is
cerevisiae cell cycle by three-dimensional reconstruction from electron
mediated by the transport factor NTF2. Curr. Biol. 8:1403–1406. http: //
micrographs of nuclear envelopes. Mol. Biol. Cell. 8:2119–2132. http ://
dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /S0960 -9822(98)00023 -2
dx .doi .org /10 .1091 /mbc .8 .11 .2119
Strambio-De-Castillia, C., M. Niepel, and M.P. Rout. 2010. The nuclear pore
Wühr, M., T. Güttler, L. Peshkin, G.C. McAlister, M. Sonnett, K. Ishihara,
complex: bridging nuclear transport and gene regulation. Nat. Rev. Mol.
A.C. Groen, M. Presler, B.K. Erickson, T.J. Mitchison, et al. 2015. The
Cell Biol. 11:490–501. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1038 /nrm2928
nuclear proteome of a vertebrate. Curr. Biol. 25:2663–2671. http ://dx .doi
Strawn, L.A., T. Shen, N. Shulga, D.S. Goldfarb, and S.R. Wente. 2004. Minimal .org /10 .1016 /j .cub .2015 .08 .047
nuclear pore complexes define FG repeat domains essential for transport.
Yamada, J., J.L. Phillips, S. Patel, G. Goldfien, A. Calestagne-Morelli, H. Huang,
Nat. Cell Biol. 6:197–206. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1038 /ncb1097
R. Reza, J. Acheson, V.V. Krishnan, S. Newsam, et al. 2010. A bimodal
Svergun, D.I. 1999. Restoring low resolution structure of biological macromolecules distribution of two distinct categories of intrinsically disordered structures
from solution scattering using simulated annealing. Biophys. J. 76:2879– with separate functions in FG nucleoporins. Mol. Cell. Proteomics.
2886. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /S0006 -3495(99)77443 -6 9:2205–2224. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1074 /mcp .M000035 -MCP201
Tagliazucchi, M., O. Peleg, M. Kröger, Y. Rabin, and I. Szleifer. 2013. Effect of Yang, Q., M.P. Rout, and C.W. Akey. 1998. Three-dimensional architecture of
charge, hydrophobicity, and sequence of nucleoporins on the translocation the isolated yeast nuclear pore complex: functional and evolutionary
of model particles through the nuclear pore complex. Proc. Natl. Acad. implications. Mol. Cell. 1:223–234. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1016 /S1097
Sci. USA. 110:3363–3368. (published erratum appears in Proc. Natl. -2765(00)80023 -4
Acad. Sci. USA. 2013. 110:10336–10337) http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1073 /pnas
.1212909110
Zahn, R., D. Osmanović, S. Ehret, C. Araya Callis, S. Frey, M. Stewart, C. You,
D. Görlich, B.W. Hoogenboom, and R.P. Richter. 2016. A physical
Tcherkasskaya, O., E.A. Davidson, and V.N. Uversky. 2003. Biophysical model describing the interaction of nuclear transport receptors with FG
constraints for protein structure prediction. J. Proteome Res. 2:37–42. nucleoporin domain assemblies. eLife. 5:5. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .7554 /
http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1021 /pr025552q eLife .14119
Terry, L.J., and S.R. Wente. 2007. Nuclear mRNA export requires specific FG Zenklusen, D., A.L. Wells, J.S. Condeelis, and R.H. Singer. 2007. Imaging re-
nucleoporins for translocation through the nuclear pore complex. J. Cell al-time gene expression in living yeast. CSH Prot. 2007:pdb.prot4870.
Biol. 178:1121–1132. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1083 /jcb .200704174
Zilman, A., S. Di Talia, B.T. Chait, M.P. Rout, and M.O. Magnasco. 2007.
Tetenbaum-Novatt, J., and M.P. Rout. 2010. The mechanism of nucleocytoplasmic Efficiency, selectivity, and robustness of nucleocytoplasmic transport.
transport through the nuclear pore complex. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. PLOS Comput. Biol. 3:e125. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1371 /journal .pcbi
Quant. Biol. 75:567–584. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1101 /sqb .2010 .75 .033 .0030125
Tetenbaum-Novatt, J., L.E. Hough, R. Mironska, A.S. McKenney, and M.P. Rout. Zilman, A., S. Di Talia, T. Jovanovic-Talisman, B.T. Chait, M.P. Rout, and
2012. Nucleocytoplasmic transport: a role for nonspecific competition in M.O. Magnasco. 2010. Enhancement of transport selectivity through
karyopherin-nucleoporin interactions. Mol. Cell. Proteomics. 11:31–46. nano-channels by non-specific competition. PLOS Comput. Biol.
http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1074 /mcp .M111 .013656 6:e1000804. http ://dx .doi .org /10 .1371 /journal .pcbi .1000804
76 JCB • Volume 215 • NumBer 1 • 2016
Downloaded
from
http://rupress.org/jcb/article-pdf/215/1/57/1596505/jcb_201601004.pdf
by
guest
on
05
December
2025
