266 766 FEDERAL SUPPLEMENT, 3d SERIES
that there are no assets left in the receiv- duty (Count XVI). The Court also DE-
ership estate that could be used to satisfy NIES BI 40’s motion for summary judg-
claims by any creditor, except for $100,000 ment as to Frost’s request for equitable
that it deposited into escrow to secure any subordination in the Receivership Action.
liability on its part to Frost. See Dkt. 88
SO ORDERED.
¶ 9; Dkt. 128 ¶ P.
[19–21] The doctrine of equitable sub- ,
ordination allows a bankruptcy court to
‘‘subordinate for purposes of distribution
all or part of an allowed claim to all or part
of another allowed claim.’’ In re Merrimac
Paper Co., 420 F.3d 53, 59 (1st Cir. 2005)
(quoting 11 U.S.C. § 510(c)(1)). This reme-
O. DOE et al., Plaintiffs,
dy is warranted when 1) ‘‘the claimant [is]
found to have engaged in inequitable con- v.
duct’’; 2) ‘‘the misconduct TTT either result-
Donald J. TRUMP et al., Defendants.
ed in injury to creditors or g[ave] the
claimant an unfair advantage’’; and 3) equi- State of New Jersey et al., Plaintiffs,
table subordination is not ‘‘in conflict with
v.
the provisions of federal bankruptcy law.’’
Id. The doctrine of equitable subordination Donald J. Trump et al., Defendants.
is applicable in receiverships. See SEC v.
Civil No. 25-10135-LTS, Civil
Spongetech Delivery Sys., Inc., 98 F.
No. 25-10139-LTS
Supp. 3d 530, 551 (E.D.N.Y. 2015).
As previously discussed, Frost has United States District Court,
raised a genuine dispute as to whether BI D. Massachusetts.
40 intentionally underfunded the receiver-
Signed February 13, 2025
ship and whether she suffered harm as a
Background: Two groups of plaintiffs,
result. If proven at trial, that underfunding
comprised of states in one group, and a
would qualify as ‘‘inequitable conduct’’ that
noncitizen expectant mother and immigra-
could justify equitably subordinating BI
tion rights groups in the other, brought
40’s interest in any remaining receivership
pair of lawsuits against the President, fed-
assets to Frost’s claim.
eral departments and agency heads chal-
ORDER lenging the constitutionality under the
Fourteenth Amendment’s Citizenship
For the foregoing reasons, BI 40’s mo-
Clause of Executive Order that directed
tion for summary judgment (Dkt. 244) is
federal agencies to cease issuing docu-
DENIED as to Frost’s claim in the Frost
ments recognizing United States citizen-
Action for tortious interference with con-
ship for certain categories of individuals
tract (Count X) with regard to her allega-
born in the United States to noncitizen or
tions of underfunding operations during
non-permanent resident parents. Each
the receivership and ALLOWED as to
group filed motion for preliminary injunc-
Frost’s other theories of tortious interfer-
tion, and cases were consolidated.
ence with contract (Count X) and her
claims of civil conspiracy (Count VII) and Holdings: The District Court, Leo T. So-
aiding and abetting a breach of fiduciary rokin, J., held that:

DOE v. TRUMP 267
Cite as 766 F.Supp.3d 266 (D.Mass. 2025)
(1) states’ identified financial harm was 3. Aliens, Immigration, and Citizenship
sufficient to confer standing; O667
(2) Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) United States O254
did not provide adequate alternative to States’ identified financial harm was a
cause of action seeking equitable relief sufficiently concrete and imminent injury
for allegedly unconstitutional actions of that was fairly traceable to the challenged
federal officials; action, so as to confer Article III standing
to bring suit alleging that President’s Ex-
(3) states, mother, and groups were likely
ecutive Order ending birthright citizenship
to succeed on merits of their claim;
for children born to fathers who were nei-
(4) states established irreparable harm fa-
ther citizens nor lawful permanent resi-
voring issuance of a preliminary injunc-
dents of the United States and mothers
tion;
who were either unlawfully or temporarily
(5) mother and groups established sub- present in the country violated the Citizen-
stantial and irreparable harm that fa- ship Clause of the Fourteenth Amend-
vored preliminary injunction; ment, where states alleged that they would
face reductions in federal funds for public
(6) balance of harms and public interest
services that were allocated based on the
favored issuance of preliminary injunc-
eligible population in the state, and as a
tion; and
result of the Executive Order, there would
(7) universal or nationwide preliminary in-
be fewer citizens and thus fewer eligible
junction was not necessary to protect
persons for such services. U.S. Const. art.
rights of mother and groups’ members.
3, § 2, cl. 1; U.S. Const. Amend. 14; Exec.
Motion granted. Order No. 14160.
4. Civil Rights O1457(7)
1. Federal Civil Procedure O103.2, 103.3 Provision of the INA providing ave-
To establish standing under Article nue for a ‘‘national of the United States’’ to
III, a plaintiff must have suffered an inju- challenge discrete denials of rights or priv-
ry in fact—a concrete and imminent harm ileges was not exclusive means of asserting
to a legally protected interest, like proper- rights associated with citizenship, nor did
ty or money—that is fairly traceable to the it provide adequate alternative to states’,
challenged conduct and likely to be re- noncitizen expectant mother’s, and immi-
dressed by the lawsuit. U.S. Const. art. 3, gration rights groups’ claim for injunctive
§ 2, cl. 1. relief to prevent enforcement of Presi-
dent’s Executive Order ending birthright
2. United States O316(4) citizenship for children whose fathers were
Test for Article III standing is satis- neither citizens nor lawful permanent resi-
fied if state- or local-government plaintiffs dents of the United States and whose
show that an allegedly unconstitutional ex- mothers were either unlawfully or tempo-
ecutive action will likely trigger a loss of rarily present in the country on grounds
federal funds to which they otherwise that it violated the Citizenship Clause of
would be entitled; such showing estab- the Fourteenth Amendment, because
lishes injury that is sufficiently concrete bringing suit in court of equity to enjoin
and imminent and fairly traceable to the unconstitutional actions by federal officials
challenged action, thereby satisfying Arti- was recognized as a valid cause of action.
cle III. U.S. Const. art. 3, § 2, cl. 1. U.S. Const. Amend. 14; Immigration and

268 766 FEDERAL SUPPLEMENT, 3d SERIES
Nationality Act § 360, 8 U.S.C.A. § 1503(a); dent’s Executive Order ending birthright
Exec. Order No. 14160. citizenship for children whose fathers were
neither citizens nor lawful permanent resi-
5. Injunction O1042
dents of the United States and whose
The test for injunctive relief requires
mothers were either unlawfully or tempo-
the plaintiffs to prove, and the court to
rarily present in the country violated the
evaluate, questions of harm that bear on
Citizenship Clause of the Fourteenth
the scope of any permanent relief ultimate-
Amendment, thus favoring issuance of pre-
ly awarded.
liminary injunction against enforcement of
6. Injunction O1016 the Executive Order; plain language of the
Citizenship Clause, as interpreted by Su-
In considering injunctive relief, court
preme Court more than a century ago and
has an independent duty to ensure that
routinely applied by all branches of the
any relief provided is appropriately tai-
government, was directed at the person
lored to address the harms established by
born or naturalized, and did not condition
the parties before it.
grant of citizenship on immigration status
7. Injunction O1092 of the parents. U.S. Const. Amend. 14;
To secure the extraordinary remedy Exec. Order No. 14160.
provided by preliminary injunctions, plain-
12. Courts O96(3)
tiffs must establish that: (1) they are likely
Lower federal courts are not merely
to succeed on the merits, (2) they are
obligated to apply the holdings of Supreme
likely to suffer irreparable harm in the
Court decisions; they also are bound by
absence of preliminary relief, (3) balance of
the Supreme Court’s considered dicta.
equities tips in their favor, and (4) an
injunction is in the public interest. 13. Courts O96(3)
8. Injunction O1096, 1106 Carefully considered statements of
the Supreme Court, even if technically dic-
First two factors of the traditional
tum, must be accorded great weight and
standard for injunctive relief, likelihood of
should be treated as authoritative when
success on merits and irreparable harm,
badges of reliability abound.
are the most critical.
9. Injunction O1246 14. Courts O96(3)
If a statement of the Supreme Court
Third and fourth factors of the injunc-
bears the earmarks of deliberative thought
tion test, balance of equities and public
purposefully expressed, concerns an issue
interest, merge when the government is
that was thoroughly debated in the recent
the opposing party.
past, and has not been diluted by any
10. Injunction O1096 subsequent pronouncement of the Su-
The sine qua non of the four-part preme Court, a lower federal court must
inquiry governing motions for preliminary adhere to it.
injunctions is the first factor: likelihood of
15. Injunction O1496
success on the merits.
Section of the INA confirming citizen-
11. Civil Rights O1457(7) ship of ‘‘a person born in the United
States, noncitizen expectant mother, States, and subject to the jurisdiction
and immigration rights groups were likely thereof,’’ provided distinct claim upon
to succeed on merits of claim that Presi- which states, noncitizen expecting mother,

DOE v. TRUMP 269
Cite as 766 F.Supp.3d 266 (D.Mass. 2025)
and immigration rights groups were likely of President’s Executive Order seeking to
to succeed, thus weighing in favor of a end birthright citizenship for children
preliminary injunction against enforcement whose fathers were neither citizens nor
of President’s Executive Order ending lawful permanent residents of the United
birthright citizenship for children born to States and whose mothers were unlawfully
fathers who were neither citizens nor law- or temporarily present in the country,
ful permanent residents of the United based on violation of the Citizenship
States and mothers who were either un- Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment,
lawfully or temporarily present in the where states faced unpredictable, continu-
country; language mirrored language in ing losses, including loss of federal reim-
the Fourteenth Amendment’s Citizenship bursements for public programs, coupled
Clause and as such was intended by Con- with serious administrative upheaval.
gress to be accorded same meaning in both U.S. Const. Amend. 14; Exec. Order No.
contexts, that citizenship was derived from 14160.
child’s birth in the United States, regard-
less of parents’ immigration status. U.S. 18. Civil Rights O1457(7)
Const. Amend. 14; Immigration and Na- Noncitizen expectant mother and im-
tionality Act § 301, 8 U.S.C.A. § 1401(a); migration rights groups established sub-
Exec. Order No. 14160. stantial and irreparable harm, thus favor-
ing issuance of preliminary injunction
16. Aliens, Immigration, and Citizenship
O655 against enforcement of President’s Execu-
tive Order seeking to end birthright citi-
Phrase ‘‘subject to the jurisdiction of’’
zenship for children whose fathers were
in Citizenship Clause of the Fourteenth
neither citizens nor lawful permanent resi-
Amendment was not a bar to citizenship
dents of the United States and whose
for children born in the United States to
mothers were unlawfully or temporarily
noncitizen mothers and fathers, and thus
present in the country, based on violation
did not provide principle that could over-
of the Citizenship Clause of the Four-
come states’, noncitizen expectant moth-
teenth Amendment; children born without
er’s, and immigration rights groups’ consti-
recognized or lawful status would face bar-
tutional challenge to President’s Executive
riers to accessing critical healthcare,
Order seeking to end birthright citizenship
among other services, along with threat of
for children whose fathers were neither
removal to countries they never lived in
citizens nor lawful permanent residents of
and possible family separation. U.S.
the United States and whose mothers were
Const. Amend. 14; Exec. Order No. 14160.
unlawfully or temporarily present in the
country; Citizenship Clause spoke only of 19. Civil Rights O1457(7)
the child and children born in the United
Balance of harms and public interest
States were both entitled to government’s
favored issuance of preliminary injunction
protection and bound to adhere to its laws,
against enforcement of President’s Execu-
regardless of parents’ characteristics.
tive Order seeking to end birthright citi-
U.S. Const. Amend. 14; Exec. Order No.
zenship for children whose fathers were
14160.
neither citizens nor lawful permanent resi-
17. Civil Rights O1457(7) dents of the United States and whose
States established substantial and ir- mothers were unlawfully or temporarily
reparable harm, thus favoring issuance of present in the country, as relief for states’,
preliminary injunction against enforcement noncitizen expectant mother’s, and immi-

270 766 FEDERAL SUPPLEMENT, 3d SERIES
gration rights groups’ claim that Execu- zens nor lawful permanent residents of the
tive Order violated the Citizenship Clause United States and whose mothers were
of the Fourteenth Amendment; affected unlawfully or temporarily present in the
children would be stripped of birthright country, on ground that it violated the
citizenship, while the government had no Fourteenth Amendment’s Citizenship
legitimate interest in pursuing unconstitu- Clause; limiting injunctive relief to the
tional agency action, and it was in the state plaintiffs would be inadequate, as
public interest to prevent violation of con- children born in other states that were not
stitutional rights. U.S. Const. Amend. 14; plaintiffs would lack birthright citizenship
Exec. Order No. 14160. even after returning or moving to, and
seeking various services in, a state that
20. Civil Rights O1457(1)
was among the plaintiffs in the lawsuit.
For purposes of the public interest
U.S. Const. Amend. 14; Exec. Order No.
factor for preliminary injunctions, it is al-
14160.
ways in the public interest to prevent the
violation of a party’s constitutional rights. 23. Civil Rights O1457(7)
Preliminary injunctive relief against
21. Civil Rights O1457(7)
federal officials other than the President,
Universal or nationwide preliminary
and other officers or agents acting on be-
injunction was not necessary to protect
half of the President, was sufficient relief
noncitizen expectant mother and immigra-
for states’, noncitizen expectant mother’s,
tion rights groups from harm during pen-
and immigration rights groups’ claim that
dency of lawsuit alleging that President’s
President’s Executive Order seeking to
Executive Order seeking to end birthright
end birthright citizenship for children
citizenship for children whose fathers were
whose fathers were neither citizens nor
neither citizens nor lawful permanent resi-
lawful permanent residents of the United
dents of the United States and whose
States and whose mothers were unlawfully
mothers were unlawfully or temporarily
or temporarily present in the country vio-
present in the country violated the Four-
lated the Fourteenth Amendment’s Citi-
teenth Amendment’s Citizenship Clause,
zenship Clause; no further action by the
and thus, federal officers and their agents
President was described by the Executive
would be enjoined from enforcing the Ex-
Order or predicted by plaintiffs, while oth-
ecutive Order against expectant mother or
er officers and agencies within the Execu-
any member of immigration rights groups,
tive Branch were responsible for imple-
where record did not establish how award-
menting the Executive Order and it was
ing similar relief to persons or organiza-
their conduct that plaintiffs really sought
tions who were not parties to the lawsuit
to restrain. U.S. Const. Amend. 14; Exec.
was necessary to provide complete relief to
Order No. 14160.
plaintiffs. U.S. Const. Amend. 14; Exec.
Order No. 14160.
MEMORANDUM OF DECISION ON
22. Civil Rights O1457(7)
MOTIONS FOR PRELIMINARY
Universal or nationwide preliminary
INJUNCTION
injunctive relief was necessary to prevent
SOROKIN, United States District
states from suffering irreparable harm as
Judge
result of President’s Executive Order
seeking to end birthright citizenship for In this pair of lawsuits, two groups of
children whose fathers were neither citi- plaintiffs advance similar challenges to the

DOE v. TRUMP 271
Cite as 766 F.Supp.3d 266 (D.Mass. 2025)
legality of one executive order among uncontested facts establish each would suf-
many issued by President Donald Trump fer direct injury from the EO’s implemen-
on January 20, 2025. The executive order tation. The plaintiffs are also likely to suc-
is titled ‘‘Protecting the Meaning and Val- ceed on the merits of their claims. In a
ue of American Citizenship’’ (‘‘the EO’’). lengthy 1898 decision, the Supreme Court
Exec. Order No. 14,160 (Jan. 20, 2025).1 examined the Citizenship Clause, adopting
The EO identifies two ‘‘categories of indi- the interpretation the plaintiffs advance
viduals born in the United States’’ to and rejecting the interpretation expressed
whom the EO says ‘‘the privilege of United in the EO. The rule and reasoning from
States citizenship does not automatically that decision were reiterated and applied
extend,’’ then directs federal departments in later decisions, adopted by Congress as
and agencies to cease issuing or accepting a matter of federal statutory law in 1940,
‘‘documents recognizing United States citi- and followed consistently by the Executive
zenship’’ for such individuals born after Branch for the past 100 years, at least. A
February 19, 2025. Doe, Doc. No. 1-1 §§ 1- single district judge would be bound to
3. apply that settled interpretation, even if a
Both groups of plaintiffs assert that the party were to present persuasive argu-
EO violates the Citizenship Clause of the ments that the long-established under-
Fourteenth Amendment to the United standing is erroneous.
State Constitution, along with other consti- The defendants, however, have offered
tutional provisions and federal statutes. no such arguments here. Their three main
Each group seeks a preliminary injunction contentions are flawed. First, allegiance in
preventing the EO from taking effect. Doe, the United States arises from the fact of
Doc. No. 10; New Jersey, Doc. No. 3. The birth. It does not depend on the status of a
motions are fully briefed and were the child’s parents, nor must it be exclusive, as
subject of a motion hearing.2 the defendants contend. Applying the de-
In opposing the requests for injunctions, fendants’ view of allegiance would mean
the defendants assert an array of argu- children of dual citizens and lawful perma-
ments, which the Court addresses briefly nent residents would not be birthright citi-
here and in detail below. For starters, each zens—a result even the defendants do not
plaintiff has standing to sue, because the support. Next, the defendants argue birth-
1. Multiple copies of the EO have been made seventy-two jurisdictions in twenty-four
part of the record before the Court. When states; eighteen members of Congress serving
referencing submissions filed in Doe et al. v. on the House Judiciary Committee; the Immi-
Trump et al., No. 25-cv-10135, the Court will gration Reform Law Institute; the State of
cite to ‘‘Doe, Doc. No. at .’’ For sub- Iowa along with seventeen other states; the
missions filed in New Jersey et al. v. Trump et State of Tennessee; and former U.S. Attorney
al., No. 25-cv-10139, the Court will cite to General Edwin Meese III. Doe, Doc. Nos. 32,
‘‘New Jersey, Doc. No. at .’’ All such
38, 40; New Jersey, Doc. Nos. 88, 118, 120,
citations use the document and page number-
122, 127, 129. The Court has considered these
ing appearing in the ECF header, except
submissions only insofar as they concern legal
where pinpoint citations reference enumerat-
issues and positions advanced by the parties.
ed sections or paragraphs within the docu-
See United States v. Sturm, Ruger & Co., 84
ment. The EO appears at Doe, Doc. No. 1-1,
F.3d 1, 6 (1st Cir. 1996) (explaining ‘‘an ami-
and New Jersey, Doc. No. 1-1.
cus cannot introduce a new argument into a
2. The Court has accepted amicus curiae briefs case’’). While several of these briefs were
from the following groups: a collection of helpful, the submission by the State of Ten-
local governments and officials representing nessee was especially well written.

272 766 FEDERAL SUPPLEMENT, 3d SERIES
right citizenship requires the mutual con- junction. Applying traditional equity prin-
sent of the person and the Nation. This ciples, such relief is necessary because the
theory disregards the original purpose of record establishes that the harms these
the Fourteenth Amendment: to recognize plaintiffs face arise not only from births
as birthright citizens the children of en- within their borders, but also when chil-
slaved persons who did not enter the coun- dren born elsewhere return or move to one
try consensually, but were brought to our of the plaintiff jurisdictions.
shores in chains. There is no basis to think
For these reasons, the plaintiffs’ motions
the drafters imposed a requirement ex-
are ALLOWED. This ruling, explained
cluding the very people the Amendment
further below and memorialized in sepa-
aimed to make citizens. Simply put, the
rate Orders issued concurrently with this
Amendment is the Nation’s consent to ac-
Memorandum, is based on straightforward
cept and protect as citizens those born
application of settled Supreme Court prec-
here, subject to the few narrow exceptions
edent reiterated and reaffirmed in various
recognized at the time of enactment, none
ways for more than a century by all three
of which are at issue here. Finally, the
branches of the federal government.
Amendment requires states to recognize
birthright citizens as citizens of their state
I. BACKGROUND
of residence. The text includes no domicile
Within hours of taking office, the Presi-
requirement at all.
dent signed the EO, which he describes as
Each of the defendants’ theories focuses
‘‘an integral part of [his] broader effort to
on the parents, rather than the child
repair the United States’ immigration sys-
whose citizenship is at stake. In so doing,
tem and to address the ongoing crises at
these interpretations stray from the text of
the southern border.’’ Doe, Doc. No. 22 at
the Citizenship Clause. The Fourteenth
14. The EO, however, does not directly
Amendment says nothing of the birthright
concern immigration; rather, it seeks to
citizen’s parents, and efforts to import
define the scope of birthright citizenship in
such considerations at the time of enact-
the United States. In the section stating
ment and when the Supreme Court con-
its purpose, the EO acknowledges that the
strued the text were rejected. This Court
Citizenship Clause and a section of the
is likewise bound to reject such theories
Immigration and Naturalization Act
now.
(‘‘INA’’), 8 U.S.C. § 1401, confer citizenship
The plaintiffs have also satisfied the oth- on any person born in the United States
er preliminary-injunction factors. Each and ‘‘subject to the jurisdiction thereof.’’
plaintiff faces irreparable harm, the defen- Doe, Doc. No. 1-1 § 1. The EO goes on to
dants face none, and the public interest identify two ‘‘categories of individuals born
favors enjoining the EO. Accordingly, the in the United States’’ but ‘‘not subject to
plaintiffs in each case are entitled to an the jurisdiction thereof,’’ to whom birth-
injunction preventing implementation of right citizenship ‘‘does not automatically
the EO. The individual and two associa- extend.’’ Id. A child falls within one of the
tions who are plaintiffs in the earlier-filed identified categories if, at the time of their
action will be fully protected by an injunc- birth, their father was neither a citizen nor
tion limited to the individual and the mem- a lawful permanent resident (‘‘LPR’’) of
bers of the associations. The later-filed the United States, and their mother was 1)
case, brought by eighteen states and two ‘‘unlawfully present in the United States,’’
cities, requires a broader, nationwide in- or 2) lawfully but temporarily present in

DOE v. TRUMP 273
Cite as 766 F.Supp.3d 266 (D.Mass. 2025)
the United States ‘‘(such as, but not limit- Protected Status’’ (‘‘TPS’’). Id. ¶ 13. Doe’s
ed to, visiting the United States under the husband, the father of the child due to be
auspices of the Visa Waiver Program or born next month, is neither a citizen nor
visiting on a student, work, or tourist LPR of this country. Id. The baby will be
visa).’’ Id. Doe’s second child; her first, now seven
The second section announces that it is years old, also was born in the United
‘‘the policy of the United States that no States. Doe, Doc. No. 11-1 ¶ 3.
department or agency’’ of the federal
Doe’s co-plaintiffs are La Colaborativa
‘‘government shall issue [or accept] docu-
and the Brazilian Worker Center, two
ments recognizing United States citizen-
membership organizations located in
ship’’ of children within the identified cate-
eastern Massachusetts who provide immi-
gories. Id. § 2. The stated policy ‘‘shall
gration-related assistance, among other
apply only to persons who are born’’ after
services. Doe, Doc. No. 1 ¶¶ 14-15. Both
February 19, 2025. Id. The EO expressly
organizations have members who are un-
does not restrict the ability of U.S.-born
lawfully present in the United States,
children of LPRs to receive or use docu-
some of whom ‘‘are either pregnant or
ments recognizing ‘‘their United States cit-
plan to grow their families in the fu-
izenship.’’ Id. Next, the EO directs the
ture.’’ Id.; see Doe, Doc. No. 11-2 ¶ 4;
Secretary of State, the Attorney General,
Doe, Doc. No. 11-3 ¶¶ 8-10. Though the
the Secretary of Homeland Security, and
present record does not conclusively es-
the Commissioner of Social Security to
tablish where the organizations’ members
‘‘take all appropriate measures to ensure
live, counsel at the motion hearing sug-
that the regulations and policies of their
gested the Court could view the mem-
respective departments and agencies are
bers as located ‘‘primarily’’ (though per-
consistent with’’ the EO, and that no one
haps not exclusively) in Massachusetts.
within any identified department ‘‘act[s],
Mot. Hr’g Tr. at 10, 76.3 Doe and the
or forbear[s] from acting, in any manner
organizations’ members have submitted
inconsistent with’’ the EO. Id. § 3(a). The
unrebutted declarations describing the
EO further requires ‘‘[t]he heads of all
harms they allege the EO will cause the
executive departments and agencies’’ to
children it targets, who will be treated
‘‘issue public guidance’’ by February 19,
as noncitizens lacking any recognized,
2025, regarding implementation of the EO.
lawful immigration status. See generally
Id. § 3(b).
Doe, Doc. Nos. 11-1 to -3.
In a complaint filed the day the EO
issued, an individual plaintiff and two non- The day after Doe and her co-plaintiffs
profit associations challenged its legality filed suit, New Jersey and a group of
and sought equitable relief preventing its seventeen other states, along with the Dis-
implementation. See generally Doe, Doc. trict of Columbia and San Francisco (col-
No. 1. The individual plaintiff, proceeding lectively, ‘‘the State plaintiffs’’), instituted
under the pseudonym ‘‘O. Doe,’’ is ‘‘an a separate action also challenging the EO
expectant mother’’ who is lawfully present under provisions of the Constitution and
in the United States ‘‘through Temporary other federal statutes.4 New Jersey, Doc.
3. The transcript of the February 7, 2025, 4. Besides New Jersey, the plaintiffs in this
hearing on the motions appears on both dock- action are Massachusetts, California, Colora-
ets. Doe, Doc. No. 44; New Jersey, Doc. No. do, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Maine,
142. Maryland, Michigan (through its Attorney

274 766 FEDERAL SUPPLEMENT, 3d SERIES
No. 1. Along with their complaint, the Doc. No. 33; New Jersey, Doc. No. 123.
State plaintiffs filed a motion for a prelimi- The Court heard argument from all parties
nary injunction supported by a memoran- on February 7, 2025.
dum and more than two dozen exhibits.
New Jersey, Doc. Nos. 3, 5, 5-1 to -27. The II. DISCUSSION
exhibits include declarations by various
Before addressing the factors governing
representatives of state agencies describ-
requests for injunctive relief, the Court
ing financial and administrative burdens
disposes of two preliminary challenges
they anticipate will result from the EO.
that the defendants suggest foreclose con-
See, e.g., New Jersey, Doc. Nos. 5-2, 5-8,
sideration of the merits of the plaintiffs’
5-14, 5-18 (describing impacts of EO on
motions. As the Court will explain, the de-
federal funding related to state health in-
fendants’ opening pair of procedural chal-
surance programs, education, foster care,
lenges, like their substantive arguments
and hospital-based process for acquiring
opposing the motions, wither in the face of
Social Security numbers at birth).
settled and binding Supreme Court prece-
Both complaints name as defendants the dent.
President, the State Department, the Sec-
retary of State, the Social Security Admin- A. Threshold Issues
istration, and the Acting Commissioner of
1. Standing
Social Security. The State plaintiffs also
The defendants first argue that the
sued the United States, the Department of
State plaintiffs lack standing to bring the
Homeland Security, the Secretary of
claims alleged in their complaint. See New
Homeland Security, the Department of
Jersey, Doc. No. 92 at 18-22. They are
Health and Human Services, and the Act-
wrong.
ing Secretary of Health and Human Ser-
vices. [1, 2] Article III of the Constitution
On January 23, 2025, the Doe plaintiffs ‘‘confines the federal judicial power to the
filed their own motion for a preliminary resolution of ‘Cases’ and ‘Controversies’ ’’
injunction, supporting memorandum, dec- in which a plaintiff can ‘‘demonstrate [a]
larations, and other exhibits. Doe, Doc. personal stake.’’ TransUnion LLC v. Ra-
Nos. 10, 11, 11-1 to -10. After hearing from mirez, 594 U.S. 413, 423, 141 S.Ct. 2190,
the parties, the Court deemed the cases 210 L.Ed.2d 568 (2021). To establish stand-
related to one another and set a consoli- ing under Article III, a ‘‘plaintiff must
dated briefing schedule. New Jersey, Doc. have suffered an injury in fact—a concrete
No. 71; Doe, Doc. No. 12. The defendants and imminent harm to a legally protected
opposed both motions, challenging the interest, like property or money—that is
State plaintiffs’ standing to sue, arguing no fairly traceable to the challenged conduct
plaintiff has advanced a valid cause of ac- and likely to be redressed by the lawsuit.’’
tion, and urging that the plaintiffs have not Biden v. Nebraska, 600 U.S. 477, 143 S. Ct.
satisfied the test governing preliminary- 2355, 2365, 216 L.Ed.2d 1063 (2023). This
injunctive relief. See generally Doe, Doc. test is satisfied if state- or local-govern-
No. 22. Both sets of plaintiffs replied. Doe, ment plaintiffs show that an allegedly un-
General), Minnesota, Nevada, New Mexico, fendants are all officers or agencies of the
New York, North Carolina, Rhode Island, United States, and at least one plaintiff in
Vermont, and Wisconsin. Venue is proper in each case resides in Massachusetts. See 28
the District of Massachusetts because the de- U.S.C. § 1391(e)(1)(C).

DOE v. TRUMP 275
Cite as 766 F.Supp.3d 266 (D.Mass. 2025)
constitutional executive action will likely dressable by the injunctive relief the State
trigger a loss of federal funds to which plaintiffs seek.
they otherwise would be entitled. See
[3] This is all the Constitution re-
Dep’t of Com. v. New York, 588 U.S. 752,
quires. Two decisions of the Supreme
767, 139 S.Ct. 2551, 204 L.Ed.2d 978
Court, both authored by Chief Justice
(2019). Such a showing establishes injury
Roberts, make the point. In 2023, the
that is ‘‘sufficiently concrete and immi-
Chief Justice, joined by five other Justices,
nent’’ and ‘‘fairly traceable’’ to the chal-
explained that Missouri had standing to
lenged action, thereby satisfying Article
challenge executive action discharging fed-
III. Id.
eral student loans, where a quasi-state
The State plaintiffs easily meet this agency stood to lose fees it would have
standard.5 Uncontested declarations from collected for servicing the forgiven loans.
officials representing several State plain- Nebraska, 143 S. Ct. at 2366. A few years
tiffs articulate various forms of federal earlier, the Chief Justice conveyed the Su-
funding that will be diminished as a direct preme Court’s unanimous conclusion that
result of the EO. States receive federal ‘‘at least some’’ states had standing to
funding to cover portions of services like challenge executive action revising the
health insurance, special education, and United States census. New York, 588 U.S.
foster care in amounts that depend on how at 767-68, 139 S.Ct. 2551.6 The proposed
many ‘‘eligible’’ children receive such ser- changes at issue raised the likelihood that
vices. Citizenship is one component of eli- persons without lawful immigration status
gibility for purposes of these programs. would be undercounted, and states faced
Pursuant to the EO, fewer children will be reductions in federal funds allocated ac-
recognized as citizens at birth. That means cording to population. Id. The State plain-
the number of persons receiving services tiffs here challenge the EO based on pre-
who are ‘‘eligible’’ under the identified fed- cisely the same sort of direct financial
eral programs will fall—and, as a direct impacts. They have identified federal
result, the reimbursements and grants the grants and reimbursements to which they
State plaintiffs receive for these services are entitled that will diminish under the
will decrease. The reduction to such fund- EO. As in Nebraska and New York, there-
ing is a concrete and imminent injury di- fore, the State plaintiffs have Article III
rectly and fairly traceable to the EO, re- standing.7
5. The defendants direct their standing chal- 6. Though some Justices parted ways as to
lenge against the State plaintiffs as a group. other issues in the case, all agreed as to
They have not contested the showing made by standing.
any individual State plaintiff or subset of
State plaintiffs. Even if the defendants had 7. The Court does not consider a parens patri-
done so, the result would be the same. The ae theory of standing, because the State plain-
record before the Court includes sworn decla- tiffs are not pursuing it. The State plaintiffs
rations establishing standing on the part of at also probably have standing based on their
least several State plaintiffs. No more is re- sovereign interests. The Citizenship Clause
quired at this juncture. See Nebraska, 143 S. defines which individuals become birthright
Ct. at 2365 (‘‘If at least one plaintiff has citizens not only of the United States, but also
standing, the suit may proceed.’’); United of the state in which they reside. U.S. Const.
States v. Texas, 599 U.S. 670, 709 n.1, 143 amend. XIV, § 1. States have general sover-
S.Ct. 1964, 216 L.Ed.2d 624 (2023) (Alito, J., eign interests in which persons are their citi-
dissenting) (‘‘In a case with multiple plain- zens. They very likely also have sovereign
tiffs, Article III permits us to reach the merits interests in which persons are U.S. citizens,
if any plaintiff has standing.’’). as state laws commonly define civic obli-

276 766 FEDERAL SUPPLEMENT, 3d SERIES
The defendants have neither disputed The defendants have not challenged the
the State plaintiffs’ showing of harm nor standing of Doe or her co-plaintiffs to
materially distinguished the Chief Justice’s sue—nor could they. Doe has plainly es-
analysis. Their standing challenge hinges tablished injury, to herself and her unborn
child, that is concrete, imminent, traceable
on an attempt to analogize this case to
to the EO, and redressable by the relief
United States v. Texas. There, the Su-
she seeks in this lawsuit. The same is true
preme Court held state plaintiffs lacked
of the association plaintiffs, which provide
standing to compel the federal government
services impacted by the EO and have
to pursue more ‘‘arrests and prosecutions’’
described one or more members facing the
for violations of immigration laws. 599 U.S.
same type of injury as Doe. See Summers
at 678-79, 143 S.Ct. 1964. The analogy is
v. Earth Island Inst., 555 U.S. 488, 498,
inapt.8 Texas involved ‘‘novel’’ theories of
129 S.Ct. 1142, 173 L.Ed.2d 1 (2009) (re-
standing and a ‘‘highly unusual’’ claim that quiring, for associational standing, ‘‘specif-
the Executive Branch was not sufficiently ic allegations establishing that at least one
vigorous in exercising its prosecutorial dis- identified member had suffered or would
cretion. Id. at 681, 684, 143 S.Ct. 1964. suffer harm’’); see also United Food &
This case, however, concerns the bounds of Com. Workers Union Loc. 751 v. Brown
citizenship guaranteed by the Constitu- Grp., Inc., 517 U.S. 544, 551-53, 116 S.Ct.
tion—not an area typically reserved for 1529, 134 L.Ed.2d 758 (1996) (describing
executive discretion. The theory of stand- test for associational standing).
ing advanced by the State plaintiffs—di- Accordingly, the defendants’ standing
rect financial harm—is ordinary.9 Texas challenge fails. All plaintiffs before the
simply does not aid the defendants here. Court have satisfied Article III.
gations such as jury service using eligibility 143 S.Ct. 1964). Contrary to the defendants’
criteria that include U.S. citizenship. E.g., characterization, that footnote is not a ‘‘hold-
N.J. Stat. Ann. § 2B:20-1(c); Mass. Gen. Laws ing,’’ and it does not ‘‘foreclose[ ]’’ the State
ch. 234A, § 4. The defendants essentially con- plaintiffs’ standing in this case. Id. Rather, it
ceded at the motion hearing that the State acknowledges that ‘‘States sometimes have
plaintiffs would have standing under these standing to sue TTT an executive agency or
theories, but suggested the theories were ‘‘for- officer,’’ and though it warns that ‘‘standing
feited,’’ at least ‘‘[f]or purposes of deciding can become more attenuated’’ when based on
[the pending] motion[s],’’ because they were ‘‘indirect effects’’ of federal action, it stops
not advanced in the State plaintiffs’ submis- short of saying such effects could never satisfy
sions thus far. Mot. Hr’g Tr. at 40, 63. The Article III. Id. This case, in any event, con-
defendants cited no authority for their forfei- cerns direct effects.
ture theory. The plaintiffs generally endorsed
the sovereign-interest theories during the 9. The harms the State plaintiffs have identi-
hearing. Given the strength of the plaintiffs’ fied are not ‘‘indirect’’—indeed, when specifi-
showing of direct financial harms, the Court cally asked, the defendants failed to identify
need not resolve whether the State plaintiffs’ any ‘‘extra step’’ separating the loss of fund-
sovereign interests supply an alternative basis ing identified by the State plaintiffs from the
for satisfying Article III. EO’s direct effects. Mot. Hr’g Tr. at 37-39.
Nor do they arise, as defendants argue, exclu-
8. In fact, the defendants’ discussion of Texas sively from services ‘‘the states have volun-
in their papers verges on misleading. The tarily chosen to provide.’’ New Jersey, Doc.
language upon which they most heavily rely No. 92 at 20; see Plyler v. Doe, 457 U.S. 202,
appears in a footnote quoted in their opposi- 230, 102 S.Ct. 2382, 72 L.Ed.2d 786 (1982)
tion memorandum and referenced during the (holding states are required by federal law to
motion hearing. See New Jersey, Doc. No. 92 provide public education services to all chil-
at 18-19 (quoting Texas, 599 U.S. at 680 n.3, dren, regardless of immigration status).

DOE v. TRUMP 277
Cite as 766 F.Supp.3d 266 (D.Mass. 2025)
2. Cause of Action Nor can the defendants short-circuit this
Next, the defendants assert the Court lawsuit by pointing to a narrow provision
must deny the pending motions because no of the INA providing an avenue for a
plaintiff has a valid cause of action under ‘‘national of the United States’’ to chal-
the Citizenship Clause or the identified lenge discrete denials of rights or privi-
federal statutes. This is meritless. leges. See id. (invoking 8 U.S.C. § 1503(a)).
That statute does not facially create an
As Justice Scalia observed, ‘‘[t]he ability
exclusive remedy for such claims, nor does
to sue to enjoin unconstitutional actions by
it offer an adequate alternative to the
state and federal officers is the creation of
claims advanced in these actions—includ-
courts of equity, and reflects a long history
ing, but not only, because it is not a mech-
of judicial review of illegal executive ac-
anism through which the State plaintiffs
tion, tracing back to England.’’ Armstrong
can obtain relief. Cf. Rusk v. Cort, 369
v. Exceptional Child Ctr., Inc., 575 U.S.
U.S. 367, 375, 82 S.Ct. 787, 7 L.Ed.2d 809
320, 327, 135 S.Ct. 1378, 191 L.Ed.2d 471
(1962) (considering related provisions of
(2015). Indeed, the Supreme Court has
same statute and concluding they were not
‘‘long held that federal courts may in some
exclusive means of asserting rights associ-
circumstances grant injunctive relief’’ to
ated with citizenship).
prevent ‘‘violations of federal law’’ planned
or committed by ‘‘state officers’’ or ‘‘by The defendants’ threshold challenges fail
federal officials.’’ Id. at 326-27, 135 S.Ct. under clear Supreme Court precedent. The
1378. The plaintiffs here ask the Court to plaintiffs assert valid causes of action and
do just that.10 have standing to pursue them. The Court,
therefore, turns to the substance of the
[4] Limitations that apply where plain-
pending motions.
tiffs seek damages, rather than equitable
relief, have no bearing on the claims pend-
B. Preliminary Injunction Analysis 11
ing here. See New Jersey, Doc. No. 92 at
24 (citing DeVillier v. Texas, 601 U.S. 285, [5–7] The familiar standard governs
291, 144 S.Ct. 938, 218 L.Ed.2d 268 (2024)). the plaintiffs’ requests for interlocutory re-
10. In fact, the Department of Justice is doing final, permanent injunction. See New Jersey,
precisely what it says the plaintiffs cannot do. Doc. No. 92 at 50 n.6. The plaintiffs expressed
The day before this Court’s motion hearing, no objection to this proposal during the mo-
the United States sued Illinois and various tion hearing, agreeing that the Court could
state and local officials, seeking equitable re- now enter a final injunction if it concluded an
lief via claims brought directly under the Su- injunction was warranted. After consider-
premacy Clause. See Compl., United States v. ation, the Court resolves now only the plain-
Illinois, No. 25-cv-1285 (N.D. Ill. Feb. 6, tiffs’ original requests for preliminary relief.
2025), ECF No. 1; cf. New Hampshire v. The defendants are correct that the plaintiffs’
Maine, 532 U.S. 742, 749-50, 121 S.Ct. 1808, causes of action ‘‘are purely legal,’’ id., but
149 L.Ed.2d 968 (2001) (discussing equitable they are wrong to imply that facts are imma-
doctrine of ‘‘judicial estoppel,’’ which in some terial here. The test for injunctive relief re-
circumstances prevents parties that have tak- quires the plaintiffs to prove, and the Court to
en one legal position from reversing course evaluate, questions of harm that bear on the
‘‘simply because [their] interests have scope of any permanent relief ultimately
changed’’ (cleaned up)). During the motion awarded. Though the defendants have leveled
hearing, the State plaintiffs raised this issue, no challenges to the plaintiffs’ factual submis-
and the defendants offered no response. sions, the Court has an independent duty to
ensure that any relief provided is appropriate-
11. The defendants proposed, in a footnote, ly tailored to address the harms established
that the Court proceed now to enter or deny a by the parties before it. Cf. DraftKings Inc. v.

278 766 FEDERAL SUPPLEMENT, 3d SERIES
lief. To secure the ‘‘extraordinary remedy’’ Comm Wireless Servs., Inc. v. SprintCom,
provided by preliminary injunctions, each Inc., 287 F.3d 1, 9 (1st Cir. 2002). This
group of plaintiffs ‘‘must establish’’ that: 1) factor weighs strongly in the plaintiffs’
they are ‘‘likely to succeed on the merits,’’ favor. The plain language of the Citizen-
2) they are ‘‘likely to suffer irreparable ship Clause—as interpreted by the Su-
harm in the absence of preliminary relief,’’ preme Court more than a century ago and
3) ‘‘the balance of equities tips in [their] routinely applied by all branches of gov-
favor,’’ and 4) ‘‘an injunction is in the ernment since then—compels a finding
public interest.’’ Winter v. Nat. Def. Res. that the plaintiffs’ challenges to the EO
Council, Inc., 555 U.S. 7, 20, 129 S.Ct. 365, are nearly certain to prevail.
172 L.Ed.2d 249 (2008).
[11] The Citizenship Clause speaks in
[8, 9] ‘‘The first two factors of the tra- plain and simple terms. ‘‘All persons born
ditional standard are the most critical.’’ or naturalized in the United States, and
Nken v. Holder, 556 U.S. 418, 434, 129 subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citi-
S.Ct. 1749, 173 L.Ed.2d 550 (2009). Courts zens of the United States and of the State
wherein they reside.’’ U.S. Const. amend.
consider them in tandem. See Vaqueria
XIV, § 1. The words chosen by the draft-
Tres Monjitas, Inc. v. Irizarry, 587 F.3d
ers and ratified by the states, understood
464, 485 (1st Cir. 2009) (noting ‘‘irrepara-
‘‘in their normal and ordinary’’ way, Unit-
ble harm is not a rigid’’ factor, but rather
ed States v. Sprague, 282 U.S. 716, 731, 51
‘‘a sliding scale, working in conjunction
S.Ct. 220, 75 L.Ed. 640 (1931), bestow
with’’ the first factor); EEOC v. Astra
birthright citizenship broadly to persons
U.S.A., Inc., 94 F.3d 738, 743 (1st Cir.
born in the United States. The text is
1996) (‘‘[W]hen the likelihood of success on
directed at the person born (or natural-
the merits is great, a movant can show
ized). It does not mention the person’s
somewhat less in the way of irreparable
parents at all, let alone expressly condition
harm and still garner preliminary injunc-
its grant of citizenship on any characteris-
tive relief.’’). The third and fourth factors
tic of the parents. So, at the outset, the EO
of the injunction test ‘‘merge when the
and its focus on the immigration status of
Government is the opposing party.’’ Nken,
a child’s parents find no support in the
556 U.S. at 435, 129 S.Ct. 1749.
text.
Measured against these standards, the
One phrase in the Citizenship Clause is
plaintiffs’ submissions support entry of the
at the heart of the parties’ disagreement.
injunctions they seek, with only minor ad-
The constitutionality of the EO, and the
justments explained below.
success of the plaintiffs’ claims, turns on
1. Likelihood of Success
the meaning of ‘‘subject to the jurisdiction
[10] ‘‘The sine qua non of th[e] four- thereof.’’ To understand that phrase, how-
part inquiry’’ governing motions for pre- ever, this Court need look no further than
liminary injunctions is the first factor: United States v. Wong Kim Ark, 169 U.S.
‘‘likelihood of success on the merits.’’ New 649, 18 S.Ct. 456, 42 L.Ed. 890 (1898).12 In
Hermalyn, 118 F.4th 416, 423 (1st Cir. 2024) opment may be required before the Court
(noting trial judge is ‘‘uniquely placed to de- crafts a final judgment.
sign’’ injunctive relief that corresponds to
12. In a line of cases not directly relevant
‘‘specific harm’’ proven based on facts found
here, courts have considered whether a per-
by judge). To that end, further factual devel-
son born in an unincorporated territory of the

DOE v. TRUMP 279
Cite as 766 F.Supp.3d 266 (D.Mass. 2025)
that case, the Supreme Court meticulously ing and eventually returned to China—was
reviewed the contours of citizenship under a citizen ‘‘by virtue of the [C]onstitution
English and early American common law, itself.’’ Wong Kim Ark, 169 U.S. at 652-53,
under the 1866 Civil Rights Act and the 703-05, 18 S.Ct. 456. This holding followed
Fourteenth Amendment, and as reflected ‘‘irresistibly’’ from the extensive analysis
in legal scholarship and court decisions in the majority articulated. Id. at 693, 18
the decades leading up to the turn of the S.Ct. 456. Throughout that analysis, the
twentieth century. See generally id. at 653- availability of birthright citizenship ‘‘irre-
704, 18 S.Ct. 456. From these sources, the spective of parentage’’ was repeatedly em-
Supreme Court concluded that ‘‘subject to phasized. E.g., id. at 690, 18 S.Ct. 456. The
the jurisdiction thereof’’ was meant ‘‘to duration of the parents’ residency in the
exclude, by the fewest and fittest words,’’ United States was not assessed, nor did
the following categories of persons: ‘‘chil- laws preventing the parents from seeking
dren of members of the Indian tribes,’’ naturalization influence the Court’s deter-
‘‘children born of alien enemies in hostile mination of the petitioner’s status. The
occupation, and children of diplomatic rep- question was resolved, for purposes of the
resentatives of a foreign state.’’13 Id. at Citizenship Clause, by the location of the
682, 18 S.Ct. 456. As to all other persons, petitioner’s birth, and the inapplicability of
‘‘the fundamental rule of citizenship by the narrow exceptions to birthright citizen-
birth within the dominion of the United ship that had been identified by the Court.
States, notwithstanding alienage of par- Understood this way—indeed, the way all
ents,’’ applied. Id. at 689, 18 S.Ct. 456.14 branches of government have understood
Applying this longstanding and ‘‘funda- the decision for 125 years—Wong Kim Ark
mental rule of citizenship,’’ the Supreme leaves no room for the defendants’ pro-
Court held that the petitioner—born in the posed reading of the Citizenship Clause. Of
United States to Chinese-citizen parents, course, the defendants can seek to revisit
who were living and working in the United this long-settled rule of law, but that is a
States at the time of the child’s birth, but matter for the Supreme Court, not a dis-
who were prevented by law from naturaliz- trict judge.
United States—such as American Samoa or, enter this country in an effort to create sleep-
for a time, the Philippines—was born ‘‘in the er cells or other hostile networks’’). Accord-
United States’’ for purposes of the Citizenship ingly, the Court need not consider this excep-
Clause. E.g., Tuaua v. United States, 788 F.3d tion to birthright citizenship.
300, 302 (D.C. Cir. 2015). That language is
not the focus of the present dispute, nor was 14. This rule has been reiterated by the Su-
it the Supreme Court’s focus in Wong Kim
preme Court. See, e.g., Perkins v. Elg, 307
Ark.
U.S. 325, 329, 59 S.Ct. 884, 83 L.Ed. 1320
13. Neither the EO nor the defendants’ brief (1939) (citing Wong Kim Ark majority’s
has suggested that all (or any) persons within ‘‘comprehensive review’’ supporting ‘‘deci-
the EO’s categories are ‘‘children born of sion TTT that a child born here of alien par-
alien enemies in hostile occupation,’’ speci- entage becomes a citizen of the United
fied which portions of the country are pres- States’’); Weedin v. Chin Bow, 274 U.S. 657,
ently so occupied, or identified which foreign 660, 670, 47 S.Ct. 772, 71 L.Ed. 1284 (1927)
powers or organizations are the ‘‘enemies’’ (stating ‘‘learned and useful opinion’’ of
presently controlling those areas. See New Wong Kim Ark majority ‘‘held that TTT one
Jersey, Doc. No. 92 at 38 (quoting another born in the United States, although TTT of a
Executive Order and summarily stating that parentage denied naturalization under the
plaintiffs’ view might grant citizenship to chil- law, was nevertheless TTT a citizen’’ under
dren of ‘‘unlawful enemy combatants who Fourteenth Amendment).

280 766 FEDERAL SUPPLEMENT, 3d SERIES
The defendants accept that this Court is ment’s common-law foundations, the pur-
bound by the prior holdings of the Su- pose and intent of its drafters, and its
preme Court. See New Jersey, Doc. No. 92 application during the first thirty years
at 44; Mot. Hr’g Tr. at 48. Nevertheless, after its ratification can be called ‘‘dicta’’ at
they urge the Court to essentially ignore all, it is undoubtedly the ‘‘considered’’ and
all but a handful of sentences from Wong ‘‘authoritative’’ sort that this Court is
Kim Ark, arguing the bulk of the majori- bound to apply. The sheer detail and
ty’s lengthy opinion is dicta. See New Jer- length of the discussion by the Court’s
sey, Doc. No. 92 at 44 (urging Wong Kim majority make this plain. Add to that the
Ark resolved only whether Citizenship fact that the opposite view—the one the
Clause extended to ‘‘children of parents defendants advance to justify the EO—was
with ‘a permanent domicile and residence
rejected by the majority in Wong Kim Ark
in the United States,’ ’’ and that ‘‘[t]he case
(in the portions of the decision now labeled
should not be read as doing anything more
‘‘dicta’’ by the defendants) and endorsed
than answering that question’’ (quoting 169
only by the dissent. See 169 U.S. at 705-32,
U.S. at 653, 18 S.Ct. 456)). At the motion
18 S.Ct. 456. The plaintiffs are not relying
hearing, the defendants doubled down on
on a stray ‘‘remark’’ that lacks ‘‘care and
this point, brazenly claiming that ‘‘dicta
exactness,’’ standing ‘‘wholly aside from
can be disregarded.’’ Mot. Hr’g Tr. at 75.
the question in judgment’’ and ‘‘unsupport-
That position reflects a serious misunder-
ed by any argument, or by any reference
standing at best—and a conscious flouting
to authorities,’’ that might not ‘‘control the
at worst—of the judicial process and the
judgment’’ of a lower court. 169 U.S. at
rule of law.
678, 18 S.Ct. 456. They are ‘‘leaning into’’
[12–14] Lower federal courts are not the central reasoning of the Supreme
merely obligated to apply the holdings of Court in support of its holding. Mot. Hr’g
Supreme Court decisions; they also ‘‘are Tr. at 48. The defendants’ argument to the
bound by the Supreme Court’s ‘considered contrary invites the Court to commit legal
dicta.’ ’’ United Nurses & Allied Prof’ls v. error.
NLRB, 975 F.3d 34, 40 (1st Cir. 2020)
Whether ‘‘holding’’ or ‘‘considered dic-
(quoting McCoy v. Mass. Inst. of Tech.,
ta,’’ the straightforward rule and limited
950 F.2d 13, 19 (1st Cir. 1991)). ‘‘Carefully
exceptions identified in Wong Kim Ark
considered statements of the Supreme
and summarized above have been applied
Court, even if technically dictum, must be
repeatedly and without hesitation, includ-
accorded great weight and should be treat-
ed as authoritative when TTT badges of ing by the Supreme Court and the First
Circuit. For example:
reliability abound.’’ United States v. Santa-
na, 6 F.3d 1, 9 (1st Cir. 1993). If such a 1 In Morrison v. California, despite
statement ‘‘bears the earmarks of delibera- statutes that then rendered Japanese
tive thought purposefully expressed,’’ con- persons ‘‘ineligible’’ for citizenship
cerns an issue that was ‘‘thoroughly debat- via naturalization, the Supreme
ed in the recent past,’’ and ‘‘has not been Court stated without qualification:
diluted by any subsequent pronounce- ‘‘A person of the Japanese race is a
ment’’ of the Supreme Court, a lower fed- citizen of the United State if he was
eral court must adhere to it. Id. born within the United States.’’ 291
To the extent the thorough analysis in U.S. 82, 85, 54 S.Ct. 281, 78 L.Ed.
Wong Kim Ark of the Fourteenth Amend- 664 (1934).

DOE v. TRUMP 281
Cite as 766 F.Supp.3d 266 (D.Mass. 2025)
1 In Dos Reis ex rel. Camara v. Ni- child born to foreigners, both of
colls, the First Circuit described a whom had entered the U.S. with
person ‘‘born in Massachusetts’’ as temporary permission but remained
having become ‘‘an American citizen, after their authorization expired, to
not by gift of Congress, but by force be ‘‘of course[ ] an American citizen
of the constitution,’’ despite his par- by birth,’’ despite the parents’ ‘‘ille-
ents’ status as foreign nationals gal presence.’’ 353 U.S. 72, 73, 77
‘‘never naturalized in the United S.Ct. 618, 1 L.Ed.2d 652 (1957); see
States,’’ and despite his own ‘‘dual id. at 79, 77 S.Ct. 618 (reflecting
nationality’’ that led to his ‘‘service dissent’s agreement that the child
as a draftee in the Portuguese was a citizen).
army.’’ 161 F.2d 860, 861-62 (1st Cir. 1 In INS v. Errico, two different chil-
1947). dren ‘‘acquired United States citizen-
1 In Kawakita v. United States, a per- ship at birth’’ despite their parents
son ‘‘born in this country in 1921 of having gained admission to this
Japanese parents who were citizens country by misrepresenting material
of Japan’’ was ‘‘a citizen of the Unit- facts about themselves and thereby
ed States by birth’’—a status the evading statutory restrictions on law-
person did not lose despite later ful immigration. 385 U.S. 214, 215-16,
committing treason by acts of cruelty 87 S.Ct. 473, 17 L.Ed.2d 318 (1966).
undertaken while working at a Japa- 1 In INS v. Rios-Pineda, a unanimous
nese camp for American prisoners Supreme Court viewed a child ‘‘born
during World War II. 343 U.S. 717, in the United States’’ as ‘‘a citizen of
720, 72 S.Ct. 950, 96 L.Ed. 1249 this country,’’ even though the father
(1952). See also Nishikawa v. Dulles, had entered the country ‘‘illegally’’
356 U.S. 129, 131, 78 S.Ct. 612, 2 on his own and ‘‘returned to Mexico
L.Ed.2d 659 (1958) (finding Japanese TTT under threat of deportation’’;
military service during World War II both parents had then ‘‘paid a pro-
was basis for expatriation of U.S.- fessional smuggler TTT to transport
born citizen of Japanese-citizen par- them’’ across the border; and the
ents only if service was voluntary); father, when apprehended again, had
Hirabayashi v. United States, 320 failed to depart voluntarily ‘‘as prom-
U.S. 81, 96-97, 63 S.Ct. 1375, 87 ised.’’ 471 U.S. 444, 446, 105 S.Ct.
L.Ed. 1774 (1943) (noting, in context 2098, 85 L.Ed.2d 452 (1985).
of World War II, that tens of thou- 1 In Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, at least six
sands of ‘‘persons of Japanese de- Justices treated the petitioner as a
scent’’ living on Pacific coast ‘‘are citizen of the United States based on
citizens because born in the United his birth in Louisiana, without even
States,’’ even though ‘‘under many discussing his parents’ status (they
circumstances’’ they also were citi- were present lawfully but temporari-
zens of Japan ‘‘by Japanese law’’). ly), despite the petitioner’s active
1 In United States ex rel. Hintopou- participation in a foreign terrorist
lous v. Shaughnessy, all members of organization. 542 U.S. 507, 510, 124
the Supreme Court considered a S.Ct. 2633, 159 L.Ed.2d 578 (2004).15
15. Justice Scalia, joined by Justice Stevens, referred to Hamdi as a ‘‘presumed American

282 766 FEDERAL SUPPLEMENT, 3d SERIES
1 In Mariko v. Holder, a panel of the pendent avenue to prevailing here. In the
First Circuit considered a child INA, Congress conferred birthright citi-
‘‘born in the United States’’ to be ‘‘a zenship via statute on several categories of
United State citizen’’ despite the par- individuals, the first of which is described
ents’ concession that both of them using language mirroring the Citizenship
‘‘were here illegally’’ and therefore Clause. 8 U.S.C. § 1401(a) (confirming citi-
removable. 632 F.3d 1, 3, 8 n.4 (1st zenship of ‘‘a person born in the United
Cir. 2011). States, and subject to the jurisdiction
thereof’’). As the plaintiffs point out, this
1 In Hasan v. Holder, a different panel
provision was enacted in 1940 and ‘‘re-
of the First Circuit similarly viewed
codified’’ in 1952. See Doe, Doc. No. 33 at
as ‘‘a U.S. citizen’’ a child born in
2; see also Doe, Doc. No. 11 at 15 (raising
California to foreign-national parents
statutory claim and advancing brief but
who had overstayed their nonimmi-
distinct argument about likelihood of suc-
grant visas. 673 F.3d 26, 28 & n.1
cess thereunder). Because it uses the same
(1st Cir. 2012).
language chosen by the Fourteenth
This line of decisions—which is not limited Amendment’s drafters—words that had
to the cases described above—further un- been studied in Wong Kim Ark decades
dermines the defendants’ proposed inter- earlier—the statute must be understood to
pretation.16 have incorporated the Supreme Court’s in-
If that were not enough to find that the terpretation of those words. See Bostock v.
Clayton Cnty., 590 U.S. 644, 654, 140 S.Ct.
plaintiffs are likely to succeed on the mer-
1731, 207 L.Ed.2d 218 (2020) (explaining
its (and it is), the fact that Congress incor-
statute ‘‘normally’’ is interpreted ‘‘in ac-
porated the language of the Citizenship
cord with the ordinary public meaning of
Clause into provisions of the INA passed
its terms at the time of its enactment’’).17
more than forty years after Wong Kim
Ark cements the meaning of the disputed [15] Here, the fundamental rule con-
phrase and provides the plaintiffs an inde- veyed by the Citizenship Clause was clear
citizen.’’ 542 U.S. at 554, 124 S.Ct. 2633 how to properly assess the original meaning
(Scalia, J., dissenting); see Hamdi v. Rums- of language in the Constitution or a federal
feld, 243 F. Supp. 2d 527, 534 (E.D. Va. 2002) statute. See Standard Oil Co. v. United States,
(noting Hamdi had ‘‘identified himself as a 221 U.S. 1, 59 & n.6, 31 S.Ct. 502, 55 L.Ed.
Saudi citizen who had been born in the Unit- 619 (1911); cf. BNSF Ry. Co. v. Loos, 586
ed States’’ when detained and interrogated by U.S. 310, 329, 139 S.Ct. 893, 203 L.Ed.2d 160
the American military). No justice took up the (2019) (Gorsuch, J., dissenting) (citing Wong
invitation of one amicus in the case to revisit Kim Ark majority opinion as authority reflect-
the meaning of the Citizenship Clause, correct ing ‘‘everyone agrees’’ that ‘‘record of enacted
the ‘‘erroneous interpretation’’ adopted in changes Congress made’’ to relevant text
Wong Kim Ark, and conclude Hamdi was not ‘‘over time’’ is ‘‘textual evidence’’ that ‘‘can
a citizen because his parents, though living in sometimes shed light on meaning’’).
Louisiana lawfully at the time of his birth,
had only temporary work visas authorizing 17. Justice Gorsuch went on to explain why
their presence in this country. See Br. Amicus this is so: ‘‘If judges could add to, remodel,
Curiae The Claremont Inst. Ctr. Const. Juris- update, or detract from old statutory terms
prudence at 2-3, 5, Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, No. inspired only by extratextual sources and our
03-6696, 2004 WL 871165 (U.S. Mar. 29, own imaginations, TTT we would deny the
2004). people the right to continue relying on the
original meaning of the law they have count-
16. So does the fact that the Supreme Court ed on to settle their rights and obligations.’’
has cited Wong Kim Ark as an example of Bostock, 590 U.S. at 654-55, 140 S.Ct. 1731.

DOE v. TRUMP 283
Cite as 766 F.Supp.3d 266 (D.Mass. 2025)
by the time § 1401 was enacted, and the ing Wong Kim Ark. See, e.g., 169 U.S. at
legislators who chose to include the same 654, 18 S.Ct. 456 (noting English common
phrase the Supreme Court already had law provided citizenship to those ‘‘born
examined presumably intended the same within the king’s allegiance, and subject to
words would be accorded the same mean- his protection’’). The defendants veer off
ing in both contexts. See Taggart v. Loren- course, however, by suggesting allegiance
zen, 587 U.S. 554, 560, 139 S.Ct. 1795, 204 must be exclusive, and that it derives from
L.Ed.2d 129 (2019) (recognizing ‘‘long- the status of a child’s parents. If that were
standing interpretive principle’’ that if so, then the children of dual citizens or
statutory term ‘‘is obviously transplanted LPRs could not receive birthright citizen-
from another legal source, it brings the old ship via the Fourteenth Amendment. A
soil with it’’ (cleaned up)). Thus, the stat- dual citizen necessarily bears some alle-
ute supports a related but distinct claim giance to both the United States and the
upon which the plaintiffs are likely to suc- second nation of which they are a citizen.
ceed.18 LPRs, unless and until naturalized, remain
foreign nationals who are citizens of other
[16] Beyond sidestepping Wong Kim
countries bearing some allegiance to their
Ark, the defendants urge the Court to
read three specific requirements into the places of origin. This principle would also
phrase ‘‘subject to the jurisdiction there- rule out the petitioner in Wong Kim Ark,
of.’’ The defendants contend these require- whose parents resided for years in the
ments are necessary to ensure adherence United States but remained ‘‘subjects of
to the phrase’s original meaning. None of the emperor of China’’ (and, indeed, re-
these requirements, however, find support turned to China when their U.S.-born son
in the text itself or the cases construing was a teenager). 169 U.S. at 652-53, 18
and applying it. And, more importantly, S.Ct. 456. The defendants, however, agree
each of them, if applied as argued, would that children of dual citizens and LPRs are
prevent the Citizenship Clause from reach- entitled to birthright citizenship, and that
ing groups of persons to whom even the the petitioner in Wong Kim Ark was as
defendants concede it must apply. well.
First, the defendants suggest the ‘‘juris- These anomalies are avoided by focusing
diction’’ phrase is satisfied only by persons on the allegiance of the child, not the
who owe the United States ‘‘allegiance’’ parents. As noted earlier, the Citizenship
that is ‘‘direct,’’ ‘‘immediate,’’ ‘‘complete,’’ Clause itself speaks only of the child. A
and ‘‘unqualified by allegiance to any alien child born in the United States necessarily
power.’’ New Jersey, Doc. No. 92 at 27-28 acquires at birth the sort of allegiance that
(cleaned up). Certainly, allegiance matters. justified birthright citizenship at the com-
Various sources link the ‘‘jurisdiction’’ mon law. That is, they are born ‘‘locally
phrase and concepts of allegiance, includ- within the dominions of’’ the United States
18. The defendants advance no separate chal- waived any discrete argument related to the
lenge to the plaintiffs’ statutory claim, statutory claim for purposes of the pending
choosing to ‘‘focus TTT on the constitutional motions. Cf. United States v. Zannino, 895
provision’’ which is ‘‘coterminous’’ with the F.2d 1, 17 (1st Cir. 1990) (applying ‘‘settled
statute. New Jersey, Doc. No. 92 at 25 n.4. appellate rule that issues adverted to in a
By opting not to address the statute, or the perfunctory manner, unaccompanied by
manner in which its enactment necessarily some effort at developed augmentation, are
strengthens the plaintiffs’ interpretation of
deemed waived’’).
the relevant language, the defendants have

284 766 FEDERAL SUPPLEMENT, 3d SERIES
and immediately ‘‘derive protection from’’ sion to do so, or without permission to
the United States. Id. at 659, 18 S.Ct. 456. remain here permanently. The absence of
A child born here is both entitled to the ‘‘mutual consent’’ in those circumstances
government’s protection and bound to ad- means, according to the defendants, that
here to its laws. This is true regardless of the children of such parents fall beyond
the characteristics of the child’s parents, the ‘‘jurisdiction’’ of the United States for
subject only to the narrow exceptions iden- Fourteenth Amendment purposes.
tified in Wong Kim Ark. Allegiance, in this
This argument fares even worse than
context, means nothing more than that.
the first. The Fourteenth Amendment en-
See id. at 662, 18 S.Ct. 456 (‘‘Birth and
shrined in the Constitution language en-
allegiance go together.’’). As James Madi-
suring ‘‘the fundamental principle of citi-
son explained:
zenship by birth’’ in the United States
It is an established maxim that birth is a
applied regardless of race—including, and
criterion of allegiance. Birth however de-
especially, to formerly enslaved persons.
rives its force sometimes from place and
169 U.S. at 675, 18 S.Ct. 456; see Afroyim
sometimes from parentage, but in gener-
v. Rusk, 387 U.S. 253, 262-63, 87 S.Ct.
al place is the most certain criterion; it
1660, 18 L.Ed.2d 757 (1967). The defen-
is what applies in the United States; it
dants do not (and could not) deny this.
will be therefore unnecessary to investi-
Enslaved persons, of course, did not ‘‘con-
gate any other.
sent’’ to come to the United States or to
Founders Online, Citizenship, Nat’l Ar-
remain here. They were brought here vio-
chives (May 22, 1789), https://founders.
lently, in chains, without their consent.
archives.gov/documents/Madison/01-12-02-
These conditions persisted after their ar-
0115 [https://perma.cc/ZC4B-NS9R]. So,
rival. Against this backdrop, it verges on
‘‘allegiance’’ does not mean what the defen-
frivolous to suggest that Congress drafted,
dants think it means, and their first pro-
debated, and passed a constitutional
posed rule founders.19
amendment, thereafter enacted by the
Next, the defendants seek to graft con-
states, that imposed a consent requirement
cepts of social-contract theory onto the
necessarily excluding the one group of peo-
‘‘jurisdiction’’ clause of the Fourteenth
ple the legislators and enactors most spe-
Amendment by arguing birthright citizen-
cifically intended to protect.
ship requires ‘‘mutual consent between
person and polity.’’ New Jersey, Doc. No. Finally, the defendants seek to trans-
92 at 45. The defendants again center form the use of the term ‘‘reside’’ at the
their argument on the parents at the ex- end of the Citizenship Clause into a basis
pense of the child whose birthright is at for finding that the ‘‘jurisdiction’’ phrase
stake—perhaps, in part, because infants eliminates any person without a lawful
are incapable of consent in the legal sense. ‘‘domicile’’ in the United States. The defen-
In the defendants’ view, mutual consent is dants contend that persons here with tem-
lacking where a person (the parent) has porary visas retain ‘‘domiciles’’ in their
entered the United States without permis- native countries, and persons here without
19. To the extent the defendants believe tem- Schooner Exchange v. McFaddon, 11 U.S. (7
porary, lawful visitors to this country are peo- Cranch) 116, 144, 3 L.Ed. 287 (1812), and its
ple who ‘‘do not owe an allegiance to the description of the ‘‘temporary and local alle-
United States,’’ Mot. Hr’g Tr. at 55, the Su- giance’’ private visitors from other countries
preme Court disagrees, see Wong Kim Ark, owe the United States while passing through
169 U.S. at 685, 18 S.Ct. 456 (quoting or doing business here).

DOE v. TRUMP 285
Cite as 766 F.Supp.3d 266 (D.Mass. 2025)
lawful status cannot establish a true ‘‘dom- and intent of the Fourteenth Amend-
icile.’’ And so, the argument goes, they ment—and, in some instances, with the
cannot ‘‘reside’’ in any state, and they re- parameters set out in the EO itself.
main outside the ‘‘jurisdiction’’ of the Unit-
For all these reasons, the Court finds
ed States for Fourteenth Amendment pur-
the plaintiffs are exceedingly likely to pre-
poses. This, once again, shifts the focus
vail on the merits of their constitutional
away from the child and the location of
and statutory claims. This conclusion
birth to the parents and the status and
would allow the plaintiffs to ‘‘show some-
duration of their presence in this country.
what less in the way of irreparable harm.’’
The word ‘‘reside’’ appears in the Citi-
Astra U.S.A., 94 F.3d at 743. That relaxed
zenship Clause only in the phrase specify-
burden, however, is not essential, as the
ing that a person entitled to birthright
second factor also favors the plaintiffs
citizenship becomes a citizen not only of
strongly.
the United States, but also of the state
where they live. For example, a state with- 2. Irreparable Harm
in the former Confederacy (or any other
[17] The plaintiffs have supported
state) could not constitutionally deny state
their assertions of irreparable harm with
citizenship to the child of a formerly en-
numerous declarations detailing the immi-
slaved person who lived and gave birth
nent and damaging impacts they anticipate
there. The word ‘‘reside’’ does not inject a
will flow from the EO. See Doe, Doc. Nos.
‘‘domicile’’ requirement limiting the reach
11-1 to -10; New Jersey, Doc. Nos. 5-2 to -
of the Citizenship Clause as a whole and
21, -23.20 Upon review, the Court accepts
justifying examination of the immigration
and credits those declarations, which the
status of a child’s parents. See New Jer-
defendants have not disputed or rebutted
sey, Doc. No. 123 at 11-12 (articulating the
in any way. The declarations establish that
flaws in this theory). In any event, it is not
the State plaintiffs do not stand to lose
so clear that ‘‘illegal entry into the country
discrete amounts of one-time funds; they
would TTT, under traditional criteria, bar a
face unpredictable, continuing losses cou-
person from obtaining domicile within a
pled with serious administrative upheaval.
State.’’ Plyler, 457 U.S. at 227 n.22, 102
They have established irreparable harm.
S.Ct. 2382.
In sum, the defendants invite the Court [18] As for the Doe plaintiffs, what is
to adopt a set of rules that work (except at stake is a bedrock constitutional guaran-
when they don’t). None of the principles tee and all of its attendant privileges. The
the defendants advance are sturdy enough loss of birthright citizenship—even if tem-
to overcome the settled interpretation and porary, and later restored at the conclu-
longstanding application of the Citizenship sion of litigation—has cascading effects
Clause described above. Each principle, that would cut across a young child’s life
applied uniformly, would lead to unintend- (and the life of that child’s family), very
ed results at odds with the text, meaning, likely leaving permanent scars. The record
20. Not every State plaintiff has submitted its the same federal programs used the same way
own declarations, but the complaint alleges and forecasts the loss of the same types of
that all face the same categories of harm. federal reimbursements. See, e.g., Doc. Nos.
E.g., New Jersey, Doc. No. 1 ¶ 122. The 5-2, -6, -11, -12, -16, -19. At this stage, that is
record supports that allegation, for example, enough to find that all State plaintiffs would
by reflecting that each official attesting to suffer irreparable harm absent injunctive re-
health-insurance-related impacts describes lief. The defendants do not contend otherwise.

286 766 FEDERAL SUPPLEMENT, 3d SERIES
before the Court establishes that children No. 25-cv-38 (D.N.H. Feb. 11, 2025), ECF
born without a recognized or lawful status No. 79.
face barriers to accessing critical health-
[19] It is difficult to imagine a govern-
care, among other services, along with the
ment or public interest that could outweigh
threat of removal to countries they have
the harms established by the plaintiffs
never lived in and possible family separa-
here. Perhaps that is why the defendants
tion.21 That is irreparable harm.22
have identified none. Instead, they point
The plaintiffs in both cases have shown only to the Executive Branch’s discretion
they are likely to suffer substantial and in matters of immigration. New Jersey,
irreparable harm in the absence of a pre- Doc. No. 92 at 49. But this case is not
liminary injunction. Thus, the two most about how ‘‘to manage the immigration
system.’’ Id. It is about the Constitution’s
important factors strongly favor the plain-
guarantee of citizenship by virtue of birth.
tiffs.
When this right was enshrined in the
3. Balance of Harms and Public Interest
Fourteenth Amendment, it was moved
firmly beyond the bounds of the ‘‘core
The final merged factors also support
executive authority’’ the defendants in-
the plaintiffs’ requests for relief. On the
voke. Id.; see Afroyim, 387 U.S. at 263, 87
plaintiffs’ side of the scales, there is a
S.Ct. 1660 (noting framers of Fourteenth
grave risk of significant and irreparable
Amendment ‘‘wanted to put citizenship be-
harm arising from the EO. Children not
yond the power of any governmental unit
yet born will be stripped of birthright citi-
to destroy’’). The defendants’ only argu-
zenship constitutionally guaranteed to
ment, therefore, adds nothing to their side
them, as confirmed by settled law and
of the scales.
practice spanning more than a dozen dec-
ades. They will be deprived of a ‘‘title’’ that [20] Though the government has
is, as ‘‘Justice Brandeis observed, TTT su- waived any other arguments on these final
perior to the title of President.’’ Tuaua, 788 factors by not developing them in their
F.3d at 301. And that harm will arise from opposition memorandum, see Zannino, 895
an EO that is unconstitutional on its face— F.2d at 17, the Court makes two more
an assessment that has now been echoed observations. First, the government has no
by multiple federal courts in different ju- legitimate interest in pursuing unconstitu-
risdictions. E.g., Prelim. Inj. Order at 6, tional agency action; ‘‘it is always in the
N.H. Indonesian Cmty. Support v. Trump, public interest to prevent the violation of a
21. Doe, for example, has a pending asylum asylum application is granted. Or, in the
petition and an older child who is a U.S. worst case, ‘‘if any removal action were initi-
citizen by birthright—assuming the defen- ated against the children of any of the private
dants do not later reconsider the effective plaintiffs at issue in this case, the [child] sub-
date contained in the EO and opt to apply ject of the action could assert their claim to
their reading of the Citizenship Clause retro- citizenship as defense in that proceeding.’’
actively, a possibility they did not definitively
New Jersey, Doc. No. 92 at 48. That answer is
rule out during the motion hearing. Mot. Hr’g
not persuasive. Cf. Texas v. EEOC, 933 F.3d
Tr. at 45-47. Her family would be placed at a
433, 448 & n.29 (5th Cir. 2019) (stating ‘‘it
distressing crossroads if her new baby were to
would strain credulity to find that an agency
face removal from the country.
action targeting’’ conduct the agency has
22. The defendants’ only responses are to sug- deemed ‘‘presumptively unlawful’’ would not
gest that the plaintiffs wait and see how the trigger implementation ‘‘immediately enough
EO will be implemented, and hope that Doe’s to constitute’’ nonspeculative injury).

DOE v. TRUMP 287
Cite as 766 F.Supp.3d 266 (D.Mass. 2025)
party’s constitutional rights.’’ Dorce v. quences). That trend raises meaningful
Wolf, 506 F. Supp. 3d 142, 145 (D. Mass. concerns about the appropriate scope of a
2020) (cleaned up); accord League of Wom- single district judge’s equitable powers.
en Voters v. Newby, 838 F.3d 1, 12 (D.C. See Trump v. Hawaii, 585 U.S. 667, 713-21,
Cir. 2016). Second, an injunction will do no 138 S.Ct. 2392, 201 L.Ed.2d 775 (2018)
more than maintain a status quo that has (Thomas, J., concurring) (examining rea-
been in place for well over a century. The sons to be ‘‘skeptical that district courts
defendants have not even attempted to have the authority to enter universal in-
demonstrate how they or the public will be junctions’’).
harmed by continuing, for the duration of
Alluding to such concerns, the defen-
this action, to adhere to the interpretation
dants urge the Court to enter relief that is
of birthright citizenship that has been con-
limited in scope. New Jersey, Doc. No. 92
sistently applied by the Executive Branch
at 49-50. Though the defendants have not
throughout that time period—including un-
proposed specific terms, two of the limita-
der this President during his first term in
tions they urge merit consideration.23
office.
First, the defendants argue ‘‘the Court
The scales tip decisively toward the
should limit any relief to any party before
plaintiffs. Because all factors favor entry of
it that is able to establish an entitlement to
injunctive relief, the Court ends by ex-
preliminary injunctive relief.’’ Id. at 50. As
plaining the appropriate parameters of
explained above, the Court has concluded
such relief.
all plaintiffs are so entitled. But that con-
clusion does not alone justify relief that is
C. Scope of Injunction
universal in scope. The Court still must
Both sets of plaintiffs ask the Court to
confront the general principle that injunc-
universally enjoin the defendants from im-
tive relief should be tailored to the parties
plementing the EO. That is, they seek an
before it. Cf. Califano v. Yamasaki, 442
order that prevents the defendants from
U.S. 682, 702, 99 S.Ct. 2545, 61 L.Ed.2d
applying the EO not only to them—to Doe,
176 (1979) (noting ‘‘injunctive relief should
to members of the plaintiff associations, be no more burdensome TTT than neces-
and to the State plaintiffs—but at all, to
sary to provide complete relief to the
anyone, anywhere. Orders like those the
plaintiffs’’). Here, the Court finds this prin-
plaintiffs seek here have become ‘‘increas-
ciple leads to different results for the two
ingly common’’ over the last twenty years.
sets of plaintiffs.
Dep’t of Homeland Sec. v. New York, –––
U.S. ––––, 140 S. Ct. 599, 600, 206 L.Ed.2d [21] For Doe and the members of the
115 (2020) (mem.) (Gorsuch, J., concurring two plaintiff organizations, the record be-
in grant of stay); see generally Develop- fore the Court does not demonstrate that
ments in the Law—District Court Reform: universal relief is necessary to ‘‘provide
Nationwide Injunctions, 137 Harv. L. Rev. complete relief to,’’ and protect the rights
1701, 1703-15 (2024) (quantifying rise in of, those parties. An injunction that pre-
such injunctions and examining conse- vents the defendants and their agents from
23. The third, which urges the Court to reject fendants do not explain how their third pro-
any facial challenge to the EO and require posal, which is supported only by a citation to
‘‘individual as-applied challenges,’’ can be re- general language from a criminal case in
jected out of hand. The plaintiffs have ad- which injunctive relief was not at issue, has
vanced substantial facial challenges that the anything to do with the scope of injunctive
Court has deemed likely to succeed. The de- relief. See New Jersey, Doc. No. 92 at 50.

288 766 FEDERAL SUPPLEMENT, 3d SERIES
implementing and applying the EO against U.S. 489, 500-04, 119 S.Ct. 1518, 143
Doe or any member of either plaintiff or- L.Ed.2d 689 (1999) (identifying as compo-
ganization suffices to protect them from nent of ‘‘right to travel’’ protected by
harm during the pendency of this lawsuit. Fourteenth Amendment ‘‘the right of the
The record does not establish how award- newly arrived citizen to the same privi-
ing similar relief to other persons or or- leges and immunities enjoyed by other citi-
ganizations that are not parties to this
zens of the same State’’). For the State
lawsuit is necessary to provide complete
plaintiffs, then, universal or nationwide re-
relief to the Doe plaintiffs.
lief is necessary to prevent them from
[22] Different considerations arise as suffering irreparable harm. Cf. Trump v.
to the State plaintiffs. They have identified Int’l Refugee Assistance Project, 582 U.S.
harms that do not hinge on the citizenship 571, 579-83, 137 S.Ct. 2080, 198 L.Ed.2d
status of one child, or even of all children 643 (2017) (narrowing in part but uphold-
born within their borders. The harms they ing in part injunction that protected non-
have established stem from the EO’s im-
parties similarly situated to the plaintiffs).
pact on the citizenship status—and the
ability to discern or verify such status—for
[23] Only one issue remains. The de-
any child located or seeking various ser-
fendants assert the Court may not enjoin
vices within their jurisdiction. For exam-
the President.24 New Jersey, Doc. No. 92
ple, Massachusetts will suffer the identi-
at 50. The Doe plaintiffs offer no response
fied harms not only if children born and
to this point, see generally Doe, Doc. No.
living there are unlawfully denied citizen-
33, but the State plaintiffs disagree in a
ship, but also if a pregnant woman living in
footnote citing instances where executive
the northeastern part of the Common-
orders have been enjoined, see New Jer-
wealth gives birth across the border in a
sey, Doc. No. 123 at 15 n.8. Assuming
nearby New Hampshire hospital, or if a
without deciding that this Court is empow-
family moves to Massachusetts from Penn-
ered to issue an injunction directly con-
sylvania (or any other state that has not
straining the President’s actions in any set
joined this lawsuit) after welcoming a new
baby. These examples illustrate why in- of circumstances, nothing in the record
junctive relief limited to the State plaintiffs suggests such relief is necessary here. The
is inadequate. In both, children born in President has signed the EO. No further
states that are not parties to this lawsuit action by him is described by the EO or
(such as New Hampshire and Pennsylva- predicted by the plaintiffs. Other officers
nia) would theoretically lack birthright citi- and agencies within the Executive Branch
zenship even after returning or moving are responsible for implementing the EO,
to—and seeking various services in—a and it is their conduct that the plaintiffs
state that is among the plaintiffs here. really seek to restrain. Thus, for purposes
That result not only fails in providing of the preliminary injunction, the relief will
complete relief to the State plaintiffs, but be awarded against all other defendants
also risks creating a new set of constitu- besides the President, and against any oth-
tional problems. See Saenz v. Roe, 526 er officers or agents acting on behalf of the
24. They also suggest the Court should dismiss sition brief), after conferral and in compli-
the President as a defendant, New Jersey, ance with the Local Rule governing motion
Doc. No. 92 at 50, but a request like that is practice in this Court. See generally L.R. 7.1.
properly advanced in a motion (not an oppo-

DOE v. TRUMP 289
Cite as 766 F.Supp.3d 266 (D.Mass. 2025)
President, but not against the President vor. The plaintiffs are likely to succeed on
himself.25 the merits of their claims under the Citi-
zenship Clause and 8 U.S.C. § 1401, they
III. CONCLUSION
are likely to suffer irreparable harm in the
‘‘What the Constitution has conferred absence of relief, the balance of harms tips
neither the Congress, nor the Executive, overwhelmingly in their favor, and the
nor the Judiciary, nor all three in concert, public interest favors an injunction.
may strip away.’’ Nishikawa, 356 U.S. at
Accordingly, pursuant to Federal Rule
138, 78 S.Ct. 612 (Black, J., concurring).
of Civil Procedure 65(a), this Court OR-
Here, the Constitution confers birthright
DERS as follows:
citizenship broadly, including to persons
within the categories described in the EO. 1. The United States Department of
Under the plain language of the Citizen- State, the Secretary of State, the
ship Clause and the INA provision that United States Social Security Admin-
later borrowed its wording, and pursuant istration, the Acting Commissioner of
to binding Supreme Court precedent, the
Social Security, and all officers,
Court concludes that the plaintiffs’ consti-
agents, employees, attorneys, and
tutional and statutory challenges to the
any other persons acting in concert
EO are likely to prevail, the plaintiffs face
with or behalf of any named defen-
serious and irreparable harm in the ab-
dant in this action (including agents,
sence of relief, the defendants face no cog-
employees, and other representatives
nizable harm from a preliminary injunc-
of President Donald J. Trump), are
tion, and the public interest is served by
ENJOINED from implementing and
preventing the implementation of a facially
enforcing Executive Order No. 14,-
unconstitutional policy.
160, ‘‘Protecting the Meaning and
Accordingly, the plaintiffs’ motions (Doe,
Value of American Citizenship,’’
Doc. No. 10, and New Jersey, Doc. No. 3)
against plaintiff O. Doe, or against
are ALLOWED as described herein. Sepa-
any member of La Colaborativa or
rate orders will issue in each case memori-
the Brazilian Worker Center.
alizing the preliminary injunctions entered
by the Court. 2. No security under Federal Rule of
Civil Procedure 65(c) is necessary or
PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION warranted in the circumstances of
For the reasons set forth in the Memo- this case, where the plaintiffs are an
randum of Decision issued today, Doc. No. individual and two local non-profit or-
46, the plaintiffs’ motion for preliminary ganizations, they seek to vindicate an
injunction (Doc. No. 3) is ALLOWED. As important constitutional and federal
explained in the Memorandum, the plain- statutory right, and the injunction
tiffs have advanced valid causes of action will not expose the defendants to fi-
seeking equitable relief, and they have nancial loss. See da Silva Medeiros v.
standing to pursue such claims. They also Martin, 458 F. Supp. 3d 122, 130
have demonstrated that each factor gov- (D.R.I. May 1, 2020) (citing Crowley
erning their request for preliminary in- v. Loc. No. 82, 679 F.2d 978, 1000-01
junctive relief weighs strongly in their fa- (1st Cir. 1982)).
25. Should circumstances arise that merit re- the plaintiffs may bring them to the Court’s
consideration of this aspect of the injunction, attention via an appropriate motion.

290 766 FEDERAL SUPPLEMENT, 3d SERIES
3. This preliminary injunction shall take er of Social Security, and all officers,
effect immediately upon the docketing agents, employees, attorneys, and
of this Order and shall remain in ef- any other persons acting in concert
fect until the entry of judgment in with or behalf of any named defen-
this matter, unless this Court, the dant in this action (including agents,
United States Court of Appeals for employees, and other representatives
the First Circuit, or the United States of President Donald J. Trump), are
Supreme Court order otherwise. ENJOINED from implementing and
SO ORDERED. enforcing Executive Order No. 14,-
160, ‘‘Protecting the Meaning and
PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION Value of American Citizenship.’’
For the reasons set forth in the Memo-
2. No security under Federal Rule of
randum of Decision issued today, Doc. No.
Civil Procedure 65(c) is necessary or
144, the plaintiffs’ motion for preliminary
warranted in the circumstances of
injunction (Doc. No. 3) is ALLOWED. As
this case, where the plaintiffs seek to
explained in the Memorandum, the plain-
vindicate an important constitutional
tiffs have advanced valid causes of action
and federal statutory right, and the
seeking equitable relief, and they have
injunction will not expose the defen-
standing to pursue such claims. They also
dants to financial loss. See da Silva
have demonstrated that each factor gov-
Medeiros v. Martin, 458 F. Supp. 3d
erning their request for preliminary in-
junctive relief weighs strongly in their fa- 122, 130 (D.R.I. May 1, 2020) (citing
vor. The plaintiffs are likely to succeed on Crowley v. Loc. No. 82, 679 F.2d 978,
the merits of their claims under the Citi- 1000-01 (1st Cir. 1982)).
zenship Clause and 8 U.S.C. § 1401, they
3. This preliminary injunction shall take
are likely to suffer irreparable harm in the
effect immediately upon the docketing
absence of relief, the balance of harms tips
of this Order and shall remain in ef-
overwhelmingly in their favor, and the
fect until the entry of judgment in
public interest favors an injunction. Addi-
this matter, unless this Court, the
tionally, the record establishes that univer-
United States Court of Appeals for
sal relief is required in order to provide
the First Circuit, or the United States
complete relief to the eighteen states and
Supreme Court order otherwise.
two cities that have brought this case.
Accordingly, pursuant to Federal Rule SO ORDERED.
of Civil Procedure 65(a), this Court OR-
DERS as follows:
1. The United States Department of
State, the Secretary of State, the ,
United States Department of Home-
land Security, the Secretary of
Homeland Security, the United
States Department of Health and
Human Services, the Acting Secre-
tary of Health and Human Services,
the United States Social Security Ad-
ministration, the Acting Commission-