Abstract
Actin is a major cytoskeletal element and is normally kept cytoplasmic by exportin 6 (Exp6)-driven nuclear export. Here, we show that Exp6 recognizes actin features that are conserved from yeast to human. Surprisingly however, microinjected actin was not exported from
Xenopus laevis
oocyte nuclei, unless Exp6 was co-injected, indicating that the pathway is inactive in this cell type. Indeed, Exp6 is undetectable in oocytes, but is synthesized from meiotic maturation onwards, which explains how actin export resumes later in embryogenesis. Exp6 thus represents the first example of a strictly developmentally regulated nuclear transport pathway. We asked why
Xenopus
oocytes lack Exp6 and observed that ectopic application of Exp6 renders the giant oocyte nuclei extremely fragile. This effect correlates with the selective disappearance of a sponge-like intranuclear scaffold of F-actin. These nuclei have a normal G2-phase DNA content in a volume 100,000 times larger than nuclei of somatic cells. Apparently, their mechanical integrity cannot be maintained by chromatin and the associated nuclear matrix, but instead requires an intranuclear actin-scaffold.
Access through your institution
Buy or subscribe
This is a preview of subscription content,
access via your institution
Access options
Access through your institution
Subscribe to this journal
Receive 12 print issues and online access
195,33 € per year
only 16,28 € per issue
Learn more
Buy this article
Purchase on SpringerLink
Instant access to full article PDF
Buy now
Prices may be subject to local taxes which are calculated during checkout
Additional access options:
Log in
Learn about institutional subscriptions
Read our FAQs
Contact customer support
Figure 1: Actin export from nuclei of
Xenopus
oocytes requires exogenous Exp6.
Figure 2:
Xenopus
Exp6 is active in nuclear actin export.
Figure 3: Xenopus oocytes stockpile
Exp6
mRNA, but selectively lack the Exp6 protein.
Figure 4: Synthesis of the Exp6 protein is induced during meiotic maturation.
Figure 5: Exp6 depletes the large actin pool from nuclei of
Xenopus
ooctyes.
Figure 6: A sponge-like actin meshwork within nuclei of
Xenopus
oocytes.
Similar content being viewed by others
Nuclear position controls the activity of cortical actomyosin networks powering simultaneous morphogenetic events
Article
Open access
12 February 2025
Cytoplasmic forces functionally reorganize nuclear condensates in oocytes
Article
Open access
29 August 2022
Centripetal nuclear shape fluctuations associate with chromatin condensation in early prophase
Article
Open access
12 July 2023
Accession codes
Accessions
GenBank/EMBL/DDBJ
AJ865375