Abstract
Mutational inactivation of the
APC
gene is a key early event in the development of familial adenomatous polyposis and colon cancer. APC suppresses tumour progression by promoting degradation of the oncogenic transcriptional activator β-catenin.
APC
gene mutations can lead to abnormally high levels of β-catenin in the nucleus, and the consequent activation of transforming genes. Here, we show that APC is a nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling protein, and that it can function as a β-catenin chaperone. APC contains two active nuclear export sequences (NES) at the amino terminus, and mutagenesis of these conserved motifs blocks nuclear export dependent on the CRM1 export receptor. Treatment of cells with the CRM1-specific export inhibitor leptomycin B shifts APC from cytoplasm to nucleus. β-catenin localization is also regulated by CRM1, but in an APC-dependent manner. Transient expression of wild-type APC in SW480 (APC
mut/mut
) colon cancer cells enhances nuclear export and degradation of β-catenin, and these effects can be blocked by mutagenesis of the APC NES. These findings suggest that wild-type APC controls the nuclear accumulation of β-catenin by a combination of nuclear export and cytoplasmic degradation.
Access through your institution
Buy or subscribe
This is a preview of subscription content,
access via your institution
Access options
Access through your institution
Subscribe to this journal
Receive 12 print issues and online access
195,33 € per year
only 16,28 € per issue
Learn more
Buy this article
Purchase on SpringerLink
Instant access to full article PDF
Buy now
Prices may be subject to local taxes which are calculated during checkout
Additional access options:
Log in
Learn about institutional subscriptions
Read our FAQs
Contact customer support
Figure 1: Nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling of APC.
Figure 2: Identification of APC nuclear export signals.
Figure 3: Site-directed NES mutations block APC nuclear export.
Figure 4: β-catenin accumulates in the nucleus when nuclear export is blocked.
Figure 5: APC(1–1,309) can export β-catenin from the nucleus.
Figure 6: Co-localization of wild-type APC and β-catenin in SW480 cells.
Figure 7: CRM1 regulates APC-dependent degradation of β-catenin.
Figure 8: Model for APC-mediated nuclear export of β-catenin.
Similar content being viewed by others
Mutant
APC
promotes tumor immune evasion via PD-L1 in colorectal cancer
Article
12 August 2021
USP10 drives cancer stemness and enables super-competitor signalling in colorectal cancer
Article
Open access
23 October 2024
Nuclear actin structure regulates chromatin accessibility
Article
Open access
15 May 2024