hare
Abstract
Rel and IκB protein families form a complex cellular regulatory network. A major regulatory function of IκB proteins is to retain Rel proteins in the cell cytoplasm. In addition, IκB proteins have also been postulated to serve nuclear functions. These include the maintenance of inducible NF-κB-dependent gene transcription, as well as termination of inducible transcription. We show that IκBα shuttles between the nucleus and the cytoplasm, utilizing the nuclear export receptor CRM1. A CRM1-binding export sequence was identified in the N-terminal domain of IκBα but not in that of IκBβ or IκBɛ. By reconstituting major aspects of NF-κB–IκB sequestration in yeast, we demonstrate that cytoplasmic retention of p65 (also called RelA) by IκBα requires Crm1p-dependent nuclear export. In mammalian cells, inhibition of CRM1 by leptomycin B resulted in nuclear localization of cotransfected p65 and IκBα in COS cells and enhanced nuclear relocation of endogenous p65 in T cells. These observations suggest that the main function of IκBα is that of a nuclear export chaperone rather than a cytoplasmic tether. We propose that the nucleus is the major site of p65-IκBα association, from where these complexes must be exported in order to create the cytoplasmic pool.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
LMB used in this study was kindly provided by M. Yoshida. We thank M. Rosbash for comments on the manuscript, Phil Gnatowski for help in the preparation of the manuscript, and Zaira Garcea for enthusiastic assistance in some of these experiments during the summer of 1998.
This work was supported by NIH grants to R.S. (AI 41035) and L.D. (GM54768).
ADDENDUM IN PROOF
The N-terminal NES in IκBα has also been identified by Johnson et al. (EMBO J.
18:
6682–6693, 1999).
Reprints and Corporate Permissions
Please note:
Selecting permissions
does not
provide access to the full text of the article, please see our help page
How do I view content?
To request a reprint or corporate permissions for this article, please click on the relevant link below:
Order Reprints
Request Corporate Permissions
Academic Permissions
Please note:
Selecting permissions
does not
provide access to the full text of the article, please see our help page
How do I view content?
Obtain permissions instantly via Rightslink by clicking on the button below:
Request Academic Permissions
If you are unable to obtain permissions via Rightslink, please complete and submit this
Permissions form
. For more information, please visit our
Permissions help page
.
Back to Top
Related research
People also read
lists articles that other readers of this article have read.
Recommended articles
lists articles that we recommend and is powered by our AI driven recommendation engine.
Cited by
lists all citing articles based on Crossref citations.
Articles with the Crossref icon will open in a new tab.
People also read
Recommended articles
Cited by
132
NEDD4L Promotes I
κ
B
α
Ubiquitination and Degradation in the Pathogenesis of Diabetic Retinopathy
Li Cui
et al.
Current Eye Research
Published online: 12 Oct 2023
Diversification from Russian nuclear fuel requires market-oriented solutions
Yanliang Pan
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists
Published online: 15 Jan 2024
N4BP3 Activates TLR4-NF-κB Pathway in Inflammatory Bowel Disease by Promoting K48-Linked IκBα Ubiquitination
Wang Jiang
et al.
Journal of Inflammation Research
Published online: 4 Jun 2025
Open Access
View more
To cite this article:
Reference style:
APA
Chicago
Harvard
Citation copied to clipboard
Copy citation to clipboard
Reference styles above use APA (6th edition), Chicago (16th edition) & Harvard (10th edition)
Download citation
Download a citation file in RIS format that can be imported by citation management software including
                EndNote, ProCite, RefWorks and Reference Manager.
Choose format:
RIS
BibTex
RefWorks Direct Export
Choose options:
Citation
Citation & abstract
Citation & references
Download citations
Information for
Authors
R&D professionals
Editors
Librarians
Societies
Open access
Overview
Open journals
Open Select
Dove Medical Press
F1000Research
Opportunities
Reprints and e-prints
Advertising solutions
Accelerated publication
Corporate access solutions
Help and information
Help and contact
Newsroom
All journals
Books
Keep up to date
Register to receive personalised research and resources by email
Sign me up
Taylor and Francis Group Facebook page
Taylor and Francis Group X Twitter page
Taylor and Francis Group Linkedin page
Taylor and Francis Group Youtube page
Taylor and Francis Group Weibo page
Taylor and Francis Group Bluesky page
Copyright © 2025
Informa UK Limited
Privacy policy
Cookies
Terms & conditions
Accessibility
Registered in England & Wales No. 01072954
5 Howick Place | London | SW1P 1WG
Copy link
✓
Thanks for sharing!
×
Find any service
AddToAny
More…